# (CC) Religion

# vii. religion

672. In the previous shapes, which broadly differentiated themselves into consciousness, self-consciousness, reason, and spirit, there is something else which has also come forth, namely, religion as the consciousness of absolute essence, yet it was to be found there only according to the standpoint of consciousness that is aware of the absolute essence. However, the absolute essence in and for itself, the self-consciousness of spirit, has not appeared in those forms. 

673. Consciousness, to the extent that it is the understanding, already becomes consciousness of the supersensible, or consciousness of the inner of objective existence. However, the supersensible, the eternal, or whatever else one may call it, is devoid of self. 1 Initially, it is only the universal which is still some distance removed from spirit knowing itself as spirit. – Following that was self-consciousness, which had its completion in the shape of the unhappy consciousness, which itself is only the grief of spirit as it struggled and then failed to force itself outwards again towards objectivity. The unity of singular self-consciousness with what is its unchangeable essence, towards which singular self-consciousness brings itself, thus remains an other-worldly beyond for self-consciousness. – Both the immediate existence of reason, which emerged for us from out of that grief, and reason’s own distinctive shapes have no religion, because the self-consciousness of those shapes knows or seeks itself in the immediate present. 

674. In contrast, in the ethical world we saw a religion, namely, the religion of the netherworld; that religion is belief in the frightful, unfamiliar night of fate and in the Eumenides of the departed spirit – the former is pure negativity in the form of universality, the latter the same negativity in the form of singular individuality. In the latter form, the absolute essence is indeed therefore the self and is current just as the self is not other than current. Yet the singular self is this singular ghostly shadow, which has universality, which is itself fate, as separated from itself. It is indeed a shadow, a sublated This, and thereby a universal self. However, that former negative meaning has still not changed into this latter positive meaning, and thus the sublated self at the same time still immediately means this particular and essenceless self. – However, fate without the self remains the night devoid of consciousness, which neither arrives at difference within itself, nor to the clarity of knowing-itself. 

675. This faith in the nothingness of necessity and in the netherworld becomes faith in heaven, because the departed self must unite itself with its universality, must hammer apart what it is within that universality that the self contains and in that way become clear to itself. However, we saw this realm of faith unfold its conceptless content only within the element of thinking, and for that reason, we saw it perish in its fate, namely, in the religion of the Enlightenment. In the religion of the Enlightenment, the supersensible other-worldly beyond of the understanding is again established, but in such a way that self-consciousness stands satisfied in thisworldliness, and it knows the empty supersensible other-worldly beyond, which is neither cognizable nor frightful, neither as a self nor as power. 

676. In the religion of morality, it is finally re-established that the absolute essence is a positive content, but that content is conjoined with the negativity of the Enlightenment. The content is being, which is likewise taken back into the self and remains closed up within it, and it is a differentiated content, whose parts are likewise immediately negated as they are set up. However, the fate into which this contradictory movement descends is the self which is conscious of itself as the fate of essentiality and actuality. 

677. Within religion, spirit knowing itself is immediately its own pure self-consciousness. Those shapes of spirit that have been examined – the true spirit, self-alienated spirit, and spirit certain of itself – together constitute spirit in its consciousness, which, confronting its world, does not cognize itself in that world. However, within conscience, spirit subjugates itself just as it has subjugated its objective world per se; it also subjugates its representational thought and its determinate concepts, and it is now selfconsciousness existing at one with itself.2 Within the latter, spirit for itself, represented as object, signifies the universal spirit which contains all essence and all actuality within itself; however, it is not in the form of free-standing actuality or in the form of self-sufficient phenomenal3 nature. Spirit has, to be sure, a shape, or the form of being, as it is an object of its consciousness. However, because in religion this consciousness is posited as having the essential determination of self-consciousness, the shape it takes is completely transparent to itself, and the actuality that it contains is enclosed in it, or is sublated in it, exactly in the manner in which we say “all actuality.” It is universal actuality, the actuality that has been thought. 4 

678. While in religion, the underlying consciousness of spirit’s determination does not therefore have the form of free-standing otherness, its existence is distinct from its self-consciousness, and its genuine actuality falls outside of religion. There is, to be sure, one spirit of both, but its consciousness does not embrace both together, and religion appears as one part of existence, as one part of various doings and strivings, whose other part is the life in spirit’s actual world. Just as we now know that both spirit in 365 its world and spirit conscious of itself as spirit, or spirit in religion, are the same, so does the consummation of religion therein consist in each of them becoming the same as the other, and not only so that religion occupies itself with spirit’s actuality, but, conversely, so that that spirit, as spirit conscious of itself, to itself, becomes actual and becomes the object of its consciousness. – To the extent that spirit in religion thinks of itself representationally, it is indeed consciousness, and the actuality implicit within religion is the shape and the garment of its representation. However, in this kind of representational thought, actuality does not receive its full due, namely, that it is not only a garment, it is also a free-standing self-sufficient existence. Conversely, because actuality lacks consummation within itself, it is a determinate shape that does not attain what it is supposed to exhibit, namely, spirit conscious of itself. For that spirit’s shape to express spirit itself, the shape would have to be nothing else but spirit itself; spirit would have had to appear to itself or would have to be actual in the way spirit is in its essence. Solely as a result, what would have been achieved might seem to demand the very opposite, namely, that the object of its consciousness have at the same time the form of free-standing actuality. However, the spirit which is object, to itself, only as absolute spirit is the spirit which is, to itself, an equally free-standing actuality as it remains therein conscious of itself. 

679. While initially self-consciousness and consciousness proper, religion and spirit in its world, or the existence of spirit, are differentiated, the latter consists in the whole of spirit insofar as its moments are exhibited as each coming undone from the others and each presenting itself for itself. However, the moments are consciousness, self-consciousness, reason, and spirit – spirit, namely, as immediate spirit which is not yet the consciousness of spirit. Their totality, taken all together, constitutes the worldly, secular5 existence of spirit per se; spirit per se contains the previous shapes in the universal determinations, in the moments just cited. Religion presupposes the whole course of the development of those moments, and it is their simple totality, or their absolute self. – In addition, in relation to religion, the course those moments travel is not to be represented as taking place in time. Only the whole spirit is in time, and the shapes, which are shapes of the whole spirit as such, exhibit themselves in a sequence, one after the other, for only the whole has genuine actuality, and the whole thus has the form of pure freedom with regard to others, which expresses itself as time. However, the moments of spirit as a whole (consciousness, self-consciousness, reason, and spirit) have, because they are moments, no existence distinct from each other. – Third, just as spirit was distinguished from its moments, so too is their isolated determination to be distinguished from these moments themselves. We saw each of those moments in its own course of development again differentiate itself in its own self and diversely shape itself, as, for example, sense certainty and perception were differentiated in consciousness. These latter aspects come undone from each other in time, and they belong to a particular whole. – For, through determination, 6 spirit descends from its universality to singular individuality. This determination, or the mediating middle, is consciousness, self-consciousness, etc. However, the shapes of these moments constitute singular individuality. Hence these exhibit spirit in its singular individuality, or actuality, and they differentiate themselves in time although the succeeding shapes retain in themselves the preceding shapes. 

680. However much religion is thus the consummation of spirit, into which, as their ground, the singular moments of spirit (consciousness, self-consciousness, reason, and spirit) both return and have returned, still together they constitute the existing actuality of the whole spirit, which is only as the differentiating movement of its aspects returning back into themselves. The coming-to-be of religion per se is contained in the movement of the universal moments. However, while each of these attributes was exhibited not only as it determines itself in general, but also in the way that each is in and for itself, i.e., as each runs its course within itself as a whole, so too has not only the coming-to-be of religion as such thereby emerged, but rather those complete courses of development of singular aspects contain at the same time the determinatenesses of religion itself. The whole spirit, the spirit of religion, is again the movement from its immediacy to the arrival at the knowing of what it is in itself or immediately is, and it is to reach the point where the shape in which it appears for the consciousness of it will be completely the same as its essence, and where it intuits itself as it is. – In this coming-to-be, spirit therefore itself is in determinate shapes that constitute the differences of this movement, and at the same time, determinate religion thereby just as much has a determinate actual spirit. However much therefore consciousness, self-consciousness, reason, and spirit belong to spirit knowing itself per se, still the determinate forms (which have each specifically developed themselves within consciousness, self-consciousness, reason, and spirit) belong to the determinate shapes of self-knowing spirit. For its actual spirit, the determinate shape of religion picks out from among the shapes of each of its moments the one that corresponds to it. The one determinateness of religion overlaps all aspects of its actual existence and stamps them all with its common character. 

681. In this way, the shapes which have thus far come on the scene are now ordered differently from the way they appeared in their own series. A few short remarks about this are necessary before we go any further. – In the series which was under examination, each moment, going deeper and deeper into itself, formed itself into a whole with its own distinctive principle, and cognition was the depth, or the spirit, within which the moments, which have no stable existence for themselves, had their substance. However, from this point on, this substance has stepped out [into view]; this substance is the depth of spirit certain of itself, which does not allow the singular principle to isolate itself and to make itself into a whole within itself. Rather, collecting all these moments within itself and holding them all together, this substance advances within this total wealth of its actual spirit, and all of its particular moments communally take into themselves and receive into themselves the same determinateness of the whole. – This self-certain spirit and its movement are their genuine actuality and the being-in-and-for-itself which corresponds to each single one. – However much, therefore, one of the previous series in its forward movement through the nodes [of the whole series] marked a regression within the series but then again continued out of those regressions in a single longitude,7 still henceforth, it is, as it were, broken at these nodes, these universal moments, and it falls apart into many lines, which, gathered together into one coil, at the same time symmetrically unite themselves so that the same differences, within which each moment itself gave itself a shape, all meet together. – In addition, it is clear from the entire exposition as to how this co-ordination of the general directions represented here is to be understood; it is equally clear that it would be superfluous to remark that these differences are essentially to be taken only as moments and not as parts of the process of coming-to-be. In actual spirit, they are attributes of its substance, but in religion, they are instead only predicates of the subject. – Likewise, in themselves or for us, all forms are indeed both contained within spirit and within each spirit. However, what is solely at issue in spirit’s actuality per se has to do with the specific determinateness which is there for spirit within its consciousness, or the determinateness in which spirit expresses its own self, or in which shape spirit knows its essence. 

682. The difference which was made between actual spirit and the spirit that knows itself as spirit, or between itself as consciousness and as selfconsciousness, is sublated within the spirit that knows itself according to its truth; its consciousness and its self-consciousness have counter-balanced each other. However, as religion is here initially immediate, this difference has not yet returned into spirit. It is only the concept of religion which is posited. In the concept, the essence is self-consciousness, which, to itself, is all truth and which contains all reality within that truth. As consciousness, this self-consciousness has itself for its object; spirit, knowing itself only immediately, is, to itself, therefore spirit in the form of immediacy, and the determinateness of the shape in which it appears to itself is that of being. This being is indeed suffused 8 neither with sensation nor with diverse matter, nor with any other set of one-sided moments, purposes, and determinations; rather, it is to be suffused with spirit itself, and it is to know itself as all truth and actuality. In this way, this suffusing, fulfillment9 is not the same as its shape, and spirit as essence is not the same as its consciousness. Spirit is initially actual as absolute spirit, while, to itself, just as it is in the certainty of itself, so is it also in its truth, or, while the extremes into which spirit as consciousness partitions itself are, for one another, in the shape of spirit. The shape adopted by spirit as the object of its consciousness remains suffused with the certainty of spirit just as it remains suffused with its substance, and by dint of this content what disappears is the descent of the object into pure objectivity, into the form of the negativity of selfconsciousness. The immediate unity of spirit with itself is the fundament, or pure consciousness, internal to which consciousness comes undone. In this way, enclosed within its pure self-consciousness, spirit is not in religion as the creator of a nature per se. Rather, what it brings out in this movement are its shapes as spirits, which together constitute the completeness of its appearance, and this movement itself is the coming-to-be of its complete actuality through its singular aspects, or through its incomplete actualities. 

683. The first actuality of spirit is the concept of religion itself, or religion as immediate and thus as natural religion; within it, spirit knows itself as its object in a natural, or immediate shape. However, the second actuality is necessarily that of spirit knowing itself in the shape of sublated naturalness, or the naturalness of the self. This is therefore religion as art, for the shape elevates itself into the form of the self through the engendering of consciousness, the result of which is that this consciousness intuits in its object its own doing, or the self. Finally, the third actuality sublates the one-sidedness of the first two; the self is an immediate self just as much as immediacy is the self. However much in the first case, spirit is in the form of consciousness and in the second in the form of self-consciousness, still in the third case, it is in the form of the unity of both. It has the shape of being-in-and-foritself, and while it is therefore represented as it is in and for itself, this is the revealed religion. However, although spirit indeed arrives at its true shape in revealed religion, the very shape itself and the representational thought10 of it are still the aspect which has not been overcome. Spirit must pass over from that aspect into the concept in order to fully dissolve the form of objectivity in the concept, the concept which likewise includes its opposite within itself. At that point, spirit has grasped the concept of itself as we have just grasped it, and its shape, or the element of its existence, is, because it is the concept, spirit itself. 

369 

# A. Natural Religion

684. Spirit knowing spirit is consciousness of itself, and it is, to itself, in the form of the objective; it is – and is at the same time being-for-itself. It is for itself, it is the aspect of self-consciousness, and, indeed, it is so in contrast to the aspect of its consciousness, or of its relating-itself-to-itself-as-object. In its consciousness, there is the opposition and, as a result, there is the determinateness of the shape in which it appears to itself and knows itself. It is this determinateness which is alone at issue in the examination of religion, for its unshaped essence, or its pure concept, has already emerged. However, the difference between consciousness and self-consciousness falls at the same time within the latter. The shape of religion does not contain the existence of spirit, neither as a free-standing nature apart from thought, nor as a free-standing thought apart from existence; rather, the shape of religion is both that of existence contained within thought and that of a thinking which, to itself, exists there.11 – It is according to the determinateness of this shape in which spirit knows itself that one religion differentiates itself from another; yet it is to be noted at the same time that the exhibition of this, namely, its knowing of itself according to this singular determinateness, does not in fact exhaust the whole of an actual religion. The series of different religions, which will result from this, will again only exhibit the different aspects of a single religion, indeed of each religion. Moreover, the representational thoughts12 which seem to mark off one actual religion from another appear in each and every one of them. Yet, at the same time, the diversity must also be regarded as a diversity of religion. While spirit is situated within the difference of its consciousness and its self-consciousness, the movement has the goal of sublating this basic difference and of giving the form of self-consciousness to the shape which is the object of consciousness. However, this difference is not already sublated as a result of the shapes which that consciousness contains also having the moments of the self in themselves and God being represented as self-consciousness. The represented self is not the actual self. For it, like every other more precise determination of the shape, to belong in truth to this shape, then in part it must be placed into this shape by self-consciousness and in part the lower determination must show itself to be both sublated and to be conceptually comprehended13 by the higher. For what is represented only ceases to be something represented, ceases to be alien to spirit’s knowing, when the self has engendered it and when it therefore both intuits the determination of the object as its own determination and, in doing so, intuits itself within that object. – At the same time and through this activity, the more ignoble determination has vanished, for the doing is the negative which is carried out at the expense of an other. In as much as that more ignoble determination is still to be found, it has withdrawn into inessentiality just as, in contrast, in those cases where the more ignoble determination still predominates, the higher determination itself is also to be found, and one determination void of self14 has its place alongside all the others. Hence, however much the various representational thoughts15 internal to a singular religion do indeed display the whole movement of its forms, still the character of each of those representations is determined by the particular 

11 Dasein . . . das sich da ist. Hegel plays on existence and “exists there.” 

12 Vorstellungen. 13 begriffen zu sein. 

14 selbstlos. 15 Vorstellungen. 

unity of consciousness and self-consciousness, which is to say, because the latter has thereby grasped within itself the determination of the object of the former and has, through its own doing, completely appropriated that determination, and because it knows it as the essential determination with regard to the others. – The truth of faith in a determination of the religious spirit shows itself therein, namely, that the actual spirit is constituted in the same way as the shape in which spirit intuits itself in the religion – in the way, for example, that the incarnation of God, which is to be found in Oriental16 religion, has no truth because its actual spirit lacks that reconciliation. – This is not the place to turn back from the totality of determinations to the individual determinations and to show in what shape the completeness of all the others is contained within both itself and its particular religion. The higher form, when placed back under a more ignoble one, is deprived of its meaning for self-conscious spirit; it only superficially belongs to spirit and its representational thought.17 It is to be examined within its own distinctive meaning only where it is the principle of this particular religion and where it proves its worth through its actual spirit. 

# a. The Luminous Essence

685. Spirit, as the essence that is self-consciousness – or as the self-conscious essence, which is all truth and knows all actuality as itself – is, in contrast to the reality which it gives itself in the movement of its consciousness, initially only its concept, and this concept, in contrast to the daytime of the development, is the night of its essence and, in contrast to the existence of its moments as self-sufficient shapes, it is the creative secret of its birth. This secret has its revelation within itself, for existence has its necessity in this concept because this concept is spirit knowing itself and thus has within its essence the moment of being consciousness and of representing itself objectively. – It is the pure I, which in its relinquishing18 has the certainty of itself in itself as the universal object, or this object is for the I the permeation of all thinking and all actuality. 

686. In the first, immediate estrangement of self-knowing absolute spirit, its shape has the determination that corresponds to immediate consciousness, or to sensuous-certainty. It intuits itself in the form of being, but not that of the spiritless being suffused with contingent determinations of sensation; rather, it is the being suffused with spirit. It likewise includes within itself the form which was to be found in immediate self-consciousness, the form of the master in contrast to the self-consciousness of spirit retreating from its object. – This being suffused with the concept of spirit, is therefore the shape of the simple relation of spirit to itself, or the shape of shapelessness. In virtue of this determination, this shape is the pure, all-containing, luminous essence of the sunrise, which suffuses everything and which preserves itself in its formless substantiality. Its otherness is the equally simple negative, darkness; the movements of its own self-relinquishing, its creations in the unresisting elements of its otherness, are all effusions of light, and in their simplicity they are at the same time both its coming-to-be-for-itself and its return out of its existence, or the shapes of consuming streams of fire. The difference that it gives itself no doubt thrives and proliferates in the substance of existence, and it shapes itself into the forms of nature; however, the essential simplicity of its thinking wanders here and there without any constancy, sometimes enlarging its boundaries to a measureless extent, and then, in its own sublimity, it brings its own beauty, which it has heightened into splendor, into dissolution. 

687. The content, which this pure being develops, or its perceiving, is thus an essenceless byplay in this substance, which only rises without setting into itself, without becoming a subject and securing its differences through the self. Its determinations are only attributes that do not flourish into selfsufficiency; rather, they remain only names of the many-named One. This One is clothed with the manifold forces of existence and with the shapes of actuality as if they were selfless ornaments. They are only heralds of its power, and they lack any will of their own, any intuitions of its glory, and any voices in its praise. 

688. However, this life in revel must determine itself into being-for-itself and must give stable existence to its vanishing shapes. Immediate being, in which it places itself over and against its consciousness, is itself the negative power that dissolves its differences. It is therefore in truth the self, and spirit therefore passes over into it in order to know itself in the form of the self. Pure light scatters its simplicity as an infinity of forms and exhibits itself as a sacrifice to being-for-itself so that the singular individual may wed himself to the stable existence in its substance. 

# b. Plants and Animals

689. Self-conscious spirit, which has taken an inward turn from out of the shapeless essence, or which has elevated its immediacy to that of the self as such, determines its simplicity as a manifoldness of being-for-itself and is the religion of spiritual perception, within which it falls apart into an innumerable plurality of weaker and stronger, richer and poorer spirits. This pantheism, which is initially the motionless stable existence of these spiritual atoms, becomes a hostile movement within itself. The innocence of the flower religion, which is only a representation of the self void of any self, passes over into the seriousness of warring life, into the guilt of animal religion; the motionless being and the impotence of intuiting individuality passes over into destructive being-for-itself. – It does not help to have taken the death of abstraction away from the things of perception and to have elevated them into the essence of spiritual perception; the ensouling of this spiritual realm has that death through the determinateness and the negativity in it which make it encroach on the innocent indifference of that religion. It is through this determinateness and negativity that the dispersal into the manifoldness of the motionless shapes of plants becomes a hostile movement in which the hatred of their being-for-itself gradually wears itself out. – The actual self-consciousness within this dispersed spirit is a multitude of thinned-out and unsociable spirits of different peoples, who, in their hatred, battle with each other to the death and become conscious of determinate shapes of animals as their essence, for they themselves are nothing more than animal spirits, segregating themselves from their conscious animal life, bereft of universality. 

690. However, in this hatred, the determinateness of purely negative being-for-itself gradually wears itself out, and through this movement of the concept, spirit enters into another shape. The sublated being-for-itself is the form of the object, a form which is brought forth by the self, or which is the engendered self instead wearing itself out, i.e., the self as it becomes a thing. Hence, the laborer retains the upper hand over these animal spirits which are only tearing each other apart, the very laborer whose doing is not only negative but rather is a steady hand and is positive. Therefore, the consciousness of spirit is henceforth the movement that is above and beyond immediate being-in-itself as well as abstract being-for-itself. While the in-itself is, through opposition, debased into a determinateness, it is no longer absolute spirit’s own form; rather, the in-itself is an actuality which finds its consciousness opposed to itself as a common existence, and it then sublates that actuality; it is likewise not only this sublating consciousness but also its representation, which engenders being-for-itself laid out in the form of an object. Nonetheless, this bringing forth is not yet a consummate activity; rather, it is a conditioned activity and is the forming of what is present at hand. 

# c. The Artisan

691. Spirit therefore here appears as the artisan, and his doing, whereby he brings forth himself as object, although not yet having taken hold of the thought of himself, is an instinctive kind of working, much like bees building their cells. 

692. The first form, because it is the immediate one, is the abstract form of the understanding, and the work is not yet in its own self suffused by spirit. The crystals of the pyramids and of the obelisks, simple combinations of straight lines with even surfaces and equal relations of parts in which the incommensurability of roundness is abolished, are the works of this artisan of rigorous form. On account of the bare intelligibility of the form, the form is not its meaning in its own self, not the spiritual self. Those works therefore either only receive spirit into themselves as an alien, departed spirit which has abandoned its living permeation with actuality, and which, being itself dead, comes to reside in these lifeless crystals: – Or they relate themselves externally to spirit as something which is there19 externally and not as spirit itself – to spirit as the light rising in the east, which casts its meaning on them. 

693. The separation from which the laboring spirit originates, the separation between being-in-itself, which becomes the material which it processes, and being-for-itself, which is the aspect of the laboring selfconsciousness, has, to itself, become objective in its work. Its further endeavor has to set itself to sublating this separation of soul and body, to clothing and shaping the soul in its own self and ensouling the body. Both aspects, while they are brought closer to each other, thereby retain with regard to each other the determinateness of represented spirit and its enveloping shell; spirit’s oneness with itself contains this opposition of singular individuality and universality. While in its aspects the work brings itself closer to itself, something else happens at the same time, namely, the work comes closer to the laboring self-consciousness, and, in the work, the latter arrives at knowing itself as it is in and for itself. However, in this way the work initially only constitutes the abstract aspect of the activity of spirit, which does not yet know its content within itself; rather, it knows this content in its work, which is a thing. The artisan himself, the whole spirit, has not yet appeared; rather, the artisan is still the inner, hidden essence, which as a whole is present only as broken apart into the active self-consciousness and the object it has brought out. 

694. Therefore, the surrounding habitation, or the external reality, which has initially been elevated only to the abstract form of the understanding, is worked up by the artisan into a more ensouled form. The artisan employs plant life for this purpose, which, unlike the way it had been in that previous, powerless pantheism, is itself no longer holy. Instead, it is taken up by the artisan, who grasps himself as the essence existing-for-itself, as something to be used, and he repositions it back to being an external aspect, an ornament. However, it is not put to such use without alteration; at the same time, the laborer of that self-conscious form destroys the transience of this life which the immediate existence of this life has in itself, and he brings its organic forms nearer to the more rigorous and universal forms of thought. The organic form, which, if left to itself, thrives in its particularity, is on the one hand subjugated by the form of thought, and, on the other hand, the artisan elevates these straight-lined and level shapes into a more ensouled curvature that becomes the root of free architecture. 

695. This dwelling, the aspect of the universal element, or the aspect of the inorganic nature of spirit, also now includes within itself a shape of singular individuality that brings nearer to actuality the spirit which had formerly been either external or internal to existence but which had been isolated from existence. By doing so, he makes the work more equal to active self-consciousness. The worker at first resorts to the form of beingfor-itself per se, to the shapes of animal life. He proves that he is no longer immediately conscious of himself in animal life by constituting himself as the productive force versus animal life and, in that life, by knowing himself as his own work. The result is that the animal shape is at the same time both sublated and becomes the hieroglyph of another meaning, the hieroglyph of thought. Hence, this shape is also no longer solely and entirely used by the worker; rather, it becomes blended with the shape of thought, with the human shape. Still, the work lacks the shape and existence in which the self exists as self. – It also still lacks in its own self the pronouncement of itself as locking within itself an inner meaning; it lacks language, the element in which the diffusing sense itself is present. Hence, the work, even when it is wholly purified of what is animalistic and even when it bears in it the shape of self-consciousness alone, is still the soundless shape that needs the rays of the rising sun in order to have a sound, which, although brought out by the light, is also only sound and not language, and which only points to an external self, not to the inner self. 

696. Standing over and against this external self is the other shape, which announces that it has in it an inner. Nature, returning back into its essence, deposes its living, isolating, self-disorienting manifoldness in all its movement, and it lowers it into an inessential casing which is the covering of the inner. This inner is at first still the simple darkness, the unmoved, the black formless stone. 

697. Both illustrations contain inwardness and existence – the two moments of spirit; and both illustrations contain both moments at the same time in opposed relationships, the self as inner as well as outer. Both are to be united. – The soul of the humanly formed statuary column does not yet come out of the inner, is not yet language, the existence that is inner in its own self– and the inner of multiform existence is still without sound, still undifferentiated within itself, still separated from its outer to which all differences belong. – The artisan thus combines both of them in his blending of the natural and self-conscious shapes. These ambiguous essences are riddles to themselves, are the conscious wrestling with the unconscious, the simple inner with the multiply shaped outer, the darkness of thought paired with the clarity of expression. Now these ambiguous essences burst out into the language of a deeper, but scarcely comprehensible, wisdom. 

698. Within this work, instinctual labor ceases, namely, the labor which, in opposition to self-consciousness, brought forth the unconscious work, for within it, the activity of the artisan, which constitutes selfconsciousness, encounters an equally self-conscious, self-expressing inner. Within that activity, the artisan has worked his way up to the estrangement of his consciousness, an estrangement in which spirit encounters spirit. In this unity of self-conscious spirit with itself, to the extent that it is, to spirit, the shape and object of its consciousness, its blending with the unconscious mode of the immediate natural shapes purify themselves. These monstrosities in shape, speech, and deed dissolve into a spiritual shape – into an outer which has taken an inward turn – and into an inner that in itself expresses itself from out of itself, is a thought that begets itself, preserves the shape appropriate to itself, and is itself a lucid existence. Spirit is artist. 

# B. The Art-Religion

376 

699. Spirit has elevated its shape, in which it is for its consciousness, into the form of consciousness itself, and it brings forth such a shape to itself. The artisan has abandoned the synthetic labor, the mixing of the alien forms of thought and the natural; while the shape has won the form of self-conscious activity, he has become a spiritual laborer. 

700. If we then ask which spirit is the actual spirit that has its consciousness of its absolute essence in the art-religion, it turns out that it is the ethical, or the true spirit. The ethical spirit is not only the universal substance of all singular individuals; rather, while for actual consciousness it has the shape of consciousness, what this amounts to is that, as it itself has individualization, it is known by those singular individuals as their own essence and work. For them, it is neither the luminous essence in whose unity the being-for-itself of self-consciousness is contained only negatively, only transitorily, and in which self-consciousness intuits the lord and master of its actuality, nor is it the restless way that self-hating peoples consume themselves, nor is it the subjection of those peoples to castes, which together constitute the semblance of the organization of a consummated whole but for which the universal freedom of individuals is missing. Rather, it is a free people, within whom the ethos20 constitutes the substance of each individual, a substance whose actuality and existence each and every singular individual knows to be his own will and deed. 

701. However, the religion of ethical spirit is its elevation above its actuality; it is the return from its truth into the pure knowing of itself. While an ethical people lives in immediate unity with its substance and does not have the principle of the pure singular individuality of self-consciousness in themselves, their religion initially comes on the scene in its consummation in its divorce from its stable existence. This is so because the actuality of the ethical substance rests in part on its motionless unchangeableness as opposed to the absolute movement of self-consciousness, and it is thus based on this self-consciousness not yet having taken the inward turn from out of its motionless ethos and its firm trust in that ethos. In part, that actuality rests on its organization into a plurality of rights and duties, as well as the actuality being distributed into the mass of the estates21 and various particular doings all of which collaborate to form the whole – hence it rests on the singular individual’s contentedness with the limitation of his existence and with his not yet having grasped the unbounded thought of his free self. However, that immediate motionless trust in the substance recedes back into self-trust and self-certainty, and the diversity of rights and duties, as well as the bounded act, is the same dialectical movement of the ethical as it is of the plurality of things and their determinations – a movement which only finds its rest and cohesion in the simplicity of spirit certain of itself. The consummation of ethical life in free self-consciousness and the fate of the ethical world is therefore the individuality that has taken the inward turn, the absolute levity of ethical spirit which has dissolved within itself all of the fixed differences of its stable existence and the social estates of its own organic structure, and, now possessed of self-certainty, has arrived at a boundless joyfulness and the freest enjoyment of itself. This simple certainty of spirit within itself has a double meaning, that of motionless stable existence and solid truth, as well as that of absolute unrest and the passing of ethical life. However, it turns around into the latter, for the truth of ethical spirit is only this substantial essence and trust, within which the self does not know itself as free singular individuality, and which thus in this inwardness, or within the self ’s coming to be free, meets its downfall. While its trust is therefore broken, and while the substance of the people is therefore shattered, spirit, which was the mediating middle of the two unstably existing extremes, henceforth stands out as the extreme of selfconsciousness grasping itself as essence. This is spirit certain within itself, which mourns over the loss of its world, and now, from out of the purity of the self, engenders its own essence, elevated above actuality. 

702. In such epochs, absolute art comes on the scene; prior to this, art is instinctual labor, which, immersed in existence, works itself both out of it and into it; it does not have its substance in a free ethical life and thus the laboring self also does not have free spiritual activity. Later, spirit goes beyond art in order to gain a higher portrayal of itself – namely, not only that of the substance born from the self, but to be this self as an object in its presentation. It is not only to give birth to itself from its concept; it is to have its concept as its shape so that the concept and the created work of art mutually know each other as one and the same. 

703. While ethical substance has thus withdrawn from its existence into its pure self-consciousness, this withdrawal is the aspect of the concept, or the activity with which spirit engenders itself as object. This aspect is pure form because the singular individual in ethical obedience and service has thereby worked off every non-conscious existence and every fixed determination just as the substance itself has become this fluid essence. This form is the night in which substance was betrayed and when it made itself into a subject. It is from out of this night of pure certainty of itself that the ethical spirit is resurrected as a shape freed from nature and its immediate existence. 

704. The existence of the pure concept into which spirit has fled from its body is an individual that spirit elects to be the vessel for its anguish. Spirit is in this individual as his universal and as his power, from which he suffers violence – as his pathos, thanks to which his self-consciousness lost its freedom. However, that positive power of universality is subjugated by the pure self of the individual as the negative power. This pure activity, aware of its captive force, wrestles with the shapeless essence. Becoming its master, this negative activity has turned its pathos into its own material and has given itself its content, and this unity emerges as a work, as the universal spirit both individualized and represented. 

# a. The Abstract Work of Art

705. The first work of art exists as immediate, abstract, and singular. For its own part, it has to move itself from this immediate and objective mode into the contrary mode of self-consciousness, just as, on the other hand, self-consciousness, which is for itself in the cult, aims at sublating the difference which it initially gives itself contrary to its own spirit, and it thereby engenders a work of art enlivening itself in its own self. 

706. The first manner in which the artistic spirit keeps its shape and its active consciousness at furthest remove from each other is the immediate shape, so that the shape is there22 as a thing as such. – In itself, the shape falls apart into the difference between singular individuality, which has the shape of the self in it, and universality, which, with reference to the shape, exhibits the inorganic essence as its environs and dwelling. Through the elevation of the whole into the pure concept, this shape attains its pure form, which belongs to spirit. It is neither the crystal, which belonged to the understanding and which houses the dead or which is illuminated by the soul external to it, nor is it the mingling of the forms of nature and of thought initially arising out of plants, whose activity is in here still an imitation. Rather, the concept strips off the root, branches, and leaves still clinging to those forms and purifies them into structures in which the crystal’s straight lines and surfaces are elevated into incommensurable relationships in such a way that the ensouling of the organic is incorporated into the abstract form of understanding and, at the same time, its essence – incommensurability – is preserved for the understanding. 

707. However, the indwelling god is the black stone drawn out of its animal encasing which is penetrated with the light of consciousness. The human shape strips off the animal shape with which it was intermingled. For the god, the animal is only a contingent disguise; the animal walks alongside its true shape and no longer counts for itself as valid. Its meaning has degenerated into that of something other, into a mere sign. As a result, the shape of the god in its own self strips off even the neediness of the natural conditions of animal existence, and it hints at those internal preparations of organic life which are merged into its surface and which belong only to this surface. – However, the essence of the god is the unity of the universal existence of nature and of self-conscious spirit, which, in its actuality, appears as confronting nature. At the same time, being at first a singular shape, its existence is one of the elements of nature just as its self-conscious actuality is a singular spirit of a people. However, in this unity, the former is the element which is reflected into spirit; it is nature transfigured by thought and united with self-conscious life. For that reason, the shape of the gods has its natural element as that which is sublated, as an obscure memory within itself. The desolated essence and convoluted strife among the free-standing, existing elements, the unethical realm of the Titans, is conquered and banished to the fringes of the actuality that has become clear to itself, to the muddy boundaries of the becalmed world which is to be found in spirit. These ancient gods, in which the luminous essence mates with the darkness and particularizes itself initially as heaven, earth, the ocean, the sun, the blind typhonic fire of the earth, etc., are replaced with shapes which in themselves only have the dark reminiscent echo of those earlier Titans and which are no longer natural beings23 but rather the clear ethical spirits of self-conscious peoples. 

708. This simple shape has thus eliminated in itself the unrest of infinite isolation – the unrest of its own as well as that of the element of nature, which only conducts itself necessarily as the universal essence, but which in its existence and in its movement conducts itself contingently. It is also the unrest of a people, which, dispersed into the doings belonging to particular social estates and into individual points of self-consciousness, has an existence composed of manifold meanings and doings – and has gathered itself up into a motionless individuality. Hence, the moment of unrest stands over and against this individuality – the essence over and against selfconsciousness, which, as the birthplace of that unrest, reserves nothing for itself other than to be pure activity. The artist gave entirely to his works what belonged to the substance, but in his own works he gave no actuality to himself as a determinate individuality; he could as a result only confer perfection on the work by relinquishing himself24 of his particularity, disembodying himself and rising to the abstraction of a pure doing. – In this first immediate creation, the work and his self-conscious activity that were separated have not yet been reunified. The work is thus not what is actually ensouled; rather, it is a whole only in combination with its coming-to-be. What is common to works of art, namely, that a work of art is created in consciousness and is made by human hands, is the moment of the concept existing as concept, which stands over and against the work. And if this concept, taken as the artist or the spectator, is unselfish enough to declare the work of art to be in its own self absolutely ensouled, and if he forgets himself doing or viewing [the work], then in opposition to this, the concept of spirit must be firmly kept in our grasp; it is the concept which cannot dispense with the moment of being conscious of itself. But this moment stands over and against the work because the concept in this, its first estrangement, gives the two aspects, in regard to and in opposition with each other, their abstract determinations of doings and thing-beings.25 Their return into the unity from which they originated has not yet come about. 

709. In his work the artist therefore experiences that he has brought forth no essence equal to himself. To be sure, there is a consciousness which comes back to him from his work, in the sense that an admiring multitude honors it as the spirit which is their essence. However, this ensouling, as it only returns his self-consciousness to him as admiration, is really a confession to the artist that the ensouled work is not equal to him. While his work comes back to him in general as enthusiasm, he does not therein find the ache of his own cultural formation and creation, the strenuousness of his work. The multitude may also still render judgment on the work, or they may bring it offerings, or, in whatever way they can, endow it with their own consciousness – if they, in their acquaintance with the work, place themselves above it, then the artist knows how much greater his deed is than their understanding and talk. If they place themselves beneath it and recognize in it an essence which dominates them, he knows himself as the master craftsman26 of that essence. 

710. The work of art thus demands another element of its existence; it demands that the god have another way of coming to light other than that in which, in the depths of his creative night, the god falls down into the very opposite, into externality, into the determination of a thing lacking self-consciousness. This higher element is language – an existence which is immediately self-conscious existence.27 Just as the singular individual selfconsciousness is there28 in language, it likewise immediately is there as a universal contagion. Complete particularization of being-for-itself is at the same time the fluidity and the universally communicated unity of the multiple selves; it is the soul existing as soul. The god which therefore has language as an element of his shape is the work of art ensouled in its own self, which immediately has pure activity in its existence, which, as a thing, had existed over and against it.29 Or, self-consciousness remains immediately at one with itself30 in its essence becoming objective. As thus being at one with itself31 within its essence, it is pure thinking, or it is the devotion whose inwardness at the same time has existence in the hymn. The hymn contains within itself the singular individuality of self-consciousness, and, in being heard, this singular individuality is there at the same time as universal singular individuality. Devotion, kindled in every individual, is the spiritual stream which in the multiplicity of self-consciousnesses is conscious of itself as the same doing in each and all, and as simple being. As this universal selfconsciousness of each and all, spirit has in one unity its pure inwardness as well as the being for others and the being-for-itself of the singular individuals. 

711. This language is distinguished from another language of the god, which is not that of universal self-consciousness. The oracle, both in the case of the god of the art-religion as well as those of the preceding religions, is the necessarily first language of the god, for it lies within the god’s concept that the god is the essence of nature as well as spirit and thus does not have only natural but also spiritual existence as well. To the extent that as this moment first lies in the god’s concept and is not yet realized in religion, language is for religious self-consciousness the language of an alien selfconsciousness. The self-consciousness which still remains alien to its own religious community32is not yet there in the way its concept requires. The self is the simple and, as a result, utterly universal being-for-itself, but that self, which is separated from the self-consciousness of the religious community, is only at first a singular individual self. – The content of this, its own singular language, results from the universal determinateness within which absolute spirit as such is posited in its religion. – The universal spirit of the sunrise, which does not yet have its existence particularized, pronounces the essence in the equally simple and universal propositions whose substantial content is sublime in its simple truth, but which, on account of this universality, appears at the same time trivial to the self-consciousness which is pressing further in its cultural formation. 

712. The further cultured self, which raises itself to being-for-itself, stands above the pure pathos of substance, is the master craftsman33 above the objectivity of the rising sun of the luminous essence, and knows that simplicity of truth, as existing-in-itself, which does not possess the form of contingent existence through an alien language, but instead is as the sure and unwritten law of the gods, a law which lives eternally, and of which nobody knows whence it came. – Just as the universal truth revealed by the luminous essence has here returned into the inner, or the lower, and it has thereby been absolved from the form of contingent appearance, so in contrast in the art-religion, because the shape of the god has assumed consciousness and therewith singular individuality per se, the god’s own language, which is the spirit of an ethical people, is the oracle, who knows the particular affairs of the people and who makes known [to them] what is useful for those affairs. However, the universal truths, because they are known as existing-in-themselves, vindicate knowingly thinking, 34 and the language of the universal truths is no longer alien but is its very own. Just as that wise man of antiquity searched within his own thinking for what was supposed to be good and beautiful but then left it to his daemon to know about the petty contingent content of what he wanted to know, for example, whether it was good for him to keep company with this or that person, or good for one of his acquaintances to go on a journey, and other such insignificant things, so too the universal consciousness takes its knowing about the contingent from birds or trees or the fermenting earth, whose vapor takes away from self-consciousness all its level-headedness. For what is contingent is the impulsive, the alien, and ethical consciousness thus also lets itself, for example, with a roll of the dice, determine itself in an impulsive and alien manner concerning these things. However much the singular individual through his intellect determines himself and however much he selects what is advantageous for him through deliberation, still it is the determinateness of his particular character which is the ground of this self-determination; this determinateness is itself contingent, and that knowing supplied by his intellect about what is advantageous for the singular individual is therefore precisely the same kind of knowing as that gained from the oracle or the casting of lots. The only difference is that the person who queries the oracle or who casts lots thereby expresses the ethical disposition of indifference towards the contingent, whereas, in contrast, the former person treats what is in itself contingent as an essential interest of his thinking and knowing. However, what is higher than both is to make deliberation into the oracle itself for a contingent doing; it is also to know that this deliberate action itself is contingent on account of its relation to the particular and to what is advantageousness. 

713. The true self-conscious existence, which is spirit in the language that is not that of an alien and thus accidental, non-universal self-consciousness, is itself the work of art which we previously saw. The work of art stands in contrast to the thing-like character of the statuary column. Just as the statuary column is motionless existence, language is disappearing existence; just as with the statuary column, objectivity is set free and lacks its own immediate self, by contrast, in language, objectivity remains too much embedded into the self, reaches too meager a shape, and, like time, it is, as it is there, no longer immediately there. 

714. The movement of both sides constitutes the cult. In that movement, the divine shape which moved in the purely sentient elements of self-consciousness and the divine shape which was motionless in the elements of thinghood have each mutually abandoned their distinctive determination, and the unity, which is the concept of their essence, comes into existence. In the cult, the self gives itself the consciousness of the divine essence descending from out of its otherworldliness towards it, and this divine essence, which previously was not actual and is only objective, as a result receives the genuine actuality of self-consciousness. 

715. This concept of the cult is in itself already contained and is present in the flow of the hymnal song. This hymnal devotion is the immediate and pure satisfaction of the self through itself and within itself. It is the purified soul, which, in this purity is immediately only essence and is at one with the essence. On account of its abstraction, the soul is not consciousness distinguishing its object from itself; it is thus only the night of its existence and the site prepared for its shape. The abstract cult consequently elevates the self up to the point where it is to be this pure divine element. The soul consciously completes this purification; nonetheless, the soul is not yet the self that has descended into its depths and knows itself to be evil; rather it is an existent self, a soul that cleanses its externality by washing it, which dons white clothing, and whose inwardness passes through the imagined35 path of labor, punishment, and reward, or through the very path itself of cultural formation which empties itself of its particularity, the very path by which it arrives at the dwellings and the community of the blessed. 

716. This cult is only at first a secret completion, i.e., is only a represented36 completion and not an actual one; it must be actual action, for an non-actual action is self-contradictory. Authentic consciousness elevates itself as a result into its pure self-consciousness. The essence has within itself the significance of a free object, and through the actual cult, the object reverts back into the self – and to the extent that the object has in pure consciousness the significance of the pure essence dwelling in an other-worldly realm beyond actuality, this essence descends through this mediation from its universality into singular individuality, and it thus merges itself with actuality. 

717. How both sides enter into action is determined in the following way. For the self-conscious aspect, to the extent that it is actual consciousness, the essence exhibits itself as actual nature; on the one hand, nature belongs to the essence as its possession and property, and it counts as existence not existing-in-itself. – On the other hand, nature is essence’s own immediate actuality and singular individuality, which essence just as well regards as non-essence and as sublated. At the same time, for its pure consciousness, that external nature signifies the opposite, namely, the essence existing-initself, with regard to which the self sacrifices its inessentiality just as, conversely, the inessential aspect of nature sacrifices itself. As a result, the action is a spiritual movement because it is this double-sidedness, that is, it is to sublate the abstraction of essence just as devotion determines the object, and it is the actual just as it is the actor who determines the object and himself, raising both up to and into universality. 

718. The action of the cult itself thus begins with the pure sacrificial dedication of a possession, which the owner, without any apparent advantage to himself, pours out or lets rise up in smoke. Standing before the essence of his pure consciousness, he thereby renounces all possession and right of property and consumption, renounces personality and the reversion of his doing into his self, and instead reflects the action off into the universal, or into the essence, rather than into himself. – But conversely the existing essence equally perishes therein. The animal offered up is the sign of a god; the fruits consumed are the living Ceres and Bacchus themselves – in the former, the powers of the higher law, which have blood and actual life, die, but in the latter, what perishes are the powers of the lower law, which bloodlessly are in possession of the secret, cunning power. – The sacrifice of the divine substance, insofar as it is a doing, belongs to the side of selfconsciousness, and for this actual doing to be possible, the essence must have already in itself sacrificed itself. It has therein done this in that it has given itself existence and made itself into a singular animal and into the fruit of the earth. This renunciation, which the essence has already in itself completed, the acting self presents in existence and for its consciousness, and it replaces that former immediate actuality with the higher actuality, namely, that of himself. The unity which has arisen, which is the result of sublated singular individuality and of the separation of both sides, is not that of only negative fate; rather, it has a positive meaning. What was sacrificed to the abstract essence of the netherworld is just given away, and what that meant was that the reflection of possession and being-for-itself into the universal is differentiated from the self as such. However, at the same time this is only a trifling part, and the other act of sacrifice is only the destruction of what cannot be used and is instead the preparation of the offering for a meal, the feast that cheats the action out of its negative significance. The person making the offering reserves for his consumption the greatest share from that first offering and what is useful from the latter offering. This consumption is the negative power that sublates the essence as well as singular individuality, and this consumption is at the same time the positive actuality in which the objective existence of the essence is transformed into self-conscious existence, and the self has consciousness of its unity with the essence. 

719. Incidentally, this cult is indeed an actual action, but its significance lies for the most part only in devotion. What belongs to this devotion is not objectively brought out, just as the result in consumption robs itself of its existence. As a result, the cult goes further and, as a result, initially replaces this defect by giving its devotion an objective stable existence, as the cult is the common work, or the work of each and every singular individual, which produces a dwelling and adornment for the honor of the god. – As a result, the objectivity of the statuary column is in part sublated, for it is through this consecration of his gifts and his labors that the laborer disposes the god to favor him, and he intuits his self as belonging to the god. In part, this doing is also not the artist’s singular labor, but rather this particularity is dissolved in universality. However, it is not only the honor of the god which comes about, and the blessing of his favor does not flow only in representational thought37 onto the worker. Rather, the meaning of the work is also the converse of the first meaning, which was that of self-relinquishing and of the honor rendered to that which is alien. The dwellings and halls of the god are for the use of man, the treasures preserved there are his own in times of need; the honor that the god enjoys in his ornamentation is the honor of a magnanimous people rich in the arts. At the festivals, the people equally adorn both their own dwellings and garments as well as their own accomplishments with graceful items. In this manner, they receive from a grateful god a reciprocation for their gifts, and they receive the proofs of his favor, in which the people bound themselves to the god through their labors, not in the hope and then in a belated actuality, but rather in attestation of the god’s honor; and in the offering of gifts, the people immediately have the enjoyment of their own wealth and finery. 

720. The people who approach their god in the cult of the art-religion are an ethical people, who know their state and its actions as the will and accomplishment of their own self. This spirit, confronting this selfconscious people, is thus not the luminous essence, which, being selfless, does not contain the certainty of the singular individual within itself but is instead only their universal essence and the dominating power in which they disappear. What the religious cult of this simple shapeless essence therefore gives back to those who belong to it is generally only that they are the people of their god; the cult secures for them only their stable existence and their simple substance as such, but not their actual self, which is instead repudiated, for they revere their god as empty depth but not as spirit. However, the cult of the art-religion does without that former abstract simplicity of essence, and it thus also does without its depth. But the essence which is immediately at one with the self is in itself spirit and the knowing truth, 38 although not yet the known truth, or the truth knowing itself in its own depth. Because here the essence thus has the self in it, its appearance is friendly towards consciousness, and in the cult, this consciousness receives not only the universal authorization of its stable existence but also its self-conscious existence in the cult, just as, conversely, the essence does not have the self-less actuality in an outcast people whose substance is only recognized, having only self-less actuality, but rather, it has actuality within the people whose self is recognized39 in its substance. 

721. Satisfied in its essence, self-consciousness thus leaves the cult, and the god takes up residence in self-consciousness as its site. This site is for itself the night of substance, or its pure individuality, but is no longer the tension-filled individuality of the artist, which has not yet reconciled itself with its essence, which itself is objectively coming to be. Rather, it is the satisfied night which has its pathos in itself, free of need, because it has returned from out of intuition, from out of the sublated objectivity. – This pathos is for itself the essence of the sunrise, but which has henceforth within itself turned inward and become the sunset; self-consciousness and thereby existence and actuality has its sunset, its downfall, in its own self. – Here it has run its course through the movement of its actualization. Depreciating itself from its pure essentiality into an objective force of nature and into the expressions of this force, it is an existence for the other, for the self by which it is consumed. The silent essence of self-less nature attains in its fruits the level where it, nature, in preparing itself and in being digested, offers itself up to self-like life; it is in its utility, or in its being able to serve as food and drink, that it attains its highest perfection. This is so because in that kind of utility, it has the possibility of a higher existence, and it comes into contact with spiritual existence. – In its metamorphosis, the spirit of the earth has in part developed into a silently powerful substance, and in part into spiritual ferment. There it flourishes as the feminine principle of nurturance, and here as the masculine principle of the self-impelling force of self-conscious existence. 

722. In this consumption, that sunrise of the luminous essence is disclosed for what it is; it is the mystery of such consumption. This is so because the mystical is neither the concealment of a secret, nor is it ignorance. Rather, it consists in the self knowing itself to be at one with the essence and the essence therefore being revealed. Only the self is revealed to itself, or what is revealed is revealed only in the immediate certainty of itself. However, it is in such certainty that the simple essence was posited by the cult. As a useful thing, it not only has existence that is seen, felt, smelt, and tasted; it is also the object of desire, and, by actually being consumed, it becomes one with the self and as a result is completely given over to this self and revealed to it. – That which is said to be obvious to reason or to the heart is in fact still secret, for it still lacks the actual certainty of immediate existence, as well as the certainty regarding what is objective and the certainty of consumption, which in religion is not only an unthinkingly immediate certainty but rather at the same time is the certainty of the self which knows itself purely. 

723. Through the cult what has hereby been revealed to self-conscious spirit within itself is the simple essence, as the movement in part of the essence’s departing from its nocturnal concealment upward into consciousness, in part to be its silently nurturing substance, in part as the movement of its likewise disappearing again into the night of the netherworld, into the self, and that of lingering above that netherworld only with silent maternal yearning. – However, the radiant impulse is the multiply named40 luminous essence of the sunrise and its reveling life, which, having equally been drained of its abstract being, has at first entered into the objective existence of the fruits of the earth, and then, surrendering itself to selfconsciousness, has arrived at its genuine actuality – it now roams about as a throng of madly rapturous women, the unrestrained revel of nature in a self-conscious shape. 

724. But what has been betrayed to consciousness is still only absolute spirit, the spirit of this simple essence and not the spirit in its own self as spirit; or, what has been betrayed is only immediate spirit, the spirit of nature. Its self-conscious life is thus only the mystery of bread and wine, of Ceres and Bacchus, not that of the other genuinely higher gods, whose individuality encompasses within itself self-consciousness as such as an essential moment. Spirit as self-conscious spirit has not yet sacrificed itself to it, and the mystery of bread and wine is not yet the mystery of flesh and blood. 

725. This unstable revel of the gods must bring itself to rest as an object, and the enthusiasm that did not make it to consciousness must produce a work that confronts it, just as the statuary column previously confronted the enthusiasm of the artist, a work which was indeed perfected, however, not as a lifeless self in its own self but rather as a living self. – One such cult is the festival which man gives in his own honor but which does not yet place into the cult the meaning of the absolute essence, for it is the essence, not yet spirit that is first revealed to it. The essence is revealed to him not as the sort of essence which essentially assumes human shape. However, this cult lays the ground for this revelation, and it lays out its moments one by one. So what is here is the abstract moment of the living embodiment of essence just as formerly there was the unity of both in an unconscious enthusiastic rapture. In place of the statuary column, man thus places himself as the shape educated and elaborated for perfectly free movement, just as the statue is the perfectly free state of motionless being. However much every singular individual knows at least how to play the part of a torchbearer, still one of them stands out from the rest, he who is the shaped movement itself, the smooth elaboration and fluent force of all the members. – He is an ensouled, living work of art, who pairs his beauty with strength, and to whom, as the prize for his power, is accorded the adornment with which the statuary column was honored; moreover, instead of the honor due to the god set in stone, he is accorded the honor of being among his people the highest bodily representation of their essence. 

726. In the two portrayals that have just come before us, the unity of self-consciousness and spiritual essence are both present. What is still lacking in them is any equilibrium. In bacchanalian enthusiasm, the self is external to itself,41 but in beautiful embodiment, it is the spiritual essence. That former dullness of consciousness together with its furious stammering must be incorporated into the clear existence of the latter embodiment, and the spiritless clarity of the latter embodiment must be incorporated into the inwardness of the former bacchanalian enthusiasm. The completed element within which inwardness is external just as externality is likewise inward is, again, language; however, it is neither the language of the oracle, which is entirely contingent and singular in its content, nor is it the hymn of feeling sung only in praise of a singular god; nor is it the contentless stammer of the bacchanalian frenzy. Rather, it has attained its clear and universal content. It has attained its clear content, for the artist has worked himself out of his initial, entirely substantial enthusiasm into a definite shape, into his own existence which is permeated and given over in all its emotional stirrings by the self-conscious soul. – It has attained its universal content, for in this festival, which is to the honor of man, the one-sidedness of the statuary columns vanishes, those statues which only contained a single national spirit, a determinate character of divinity. The beautiful fencer is indeed the honor of his particular people, but he is an embodied singular individual in which the comprehensiveness and seriousness of meaning, along with the inner character of the spirit which underlies the particular life, interests, needs, and mores of his people, has met its downfall. In this self-relinquishing into complete embodiment, spirit has cast off the particular impressions and echoes of nature, which, as the actual spirit of the people, it encompassed within itself. Its people thus are, to themselves, no longer conscious of their particularity in that spirit, but rather, are instead conscious of casting off this particularity and of the universality of their human existence. 

# c. The Spiritual Work of Art

727. The spirits of [different] peoples, which become conscious of the shape of their essence in a particular animal, merge into one spirit; in that way, the particular beautiful spirits of a people combine themselves into one pantheon whose element and abode is language. The pure intuition of itself as universal humanity in the actuality of the spirit of a people, has the form that it combines itself with other spirits of a people, with whom it constitutes through nature one nation, combining into a common undertaking, and for this work, it fashions an entire people and thereby an entire heaven. This universality which spirit arrives at in its existence is, though, only this first universality which initially originates from the individuality of ethical life, not yet having overcome its immediacy, not having fashioned one state out of these separate tribes. The ethical life of the actual spirit of a people rests partly on the immediate trust of the singular individuals in the whole of their people, partly in the immediate participation which all, irrespective of differences of estate, take in the resolutions and business of their government. Within the union, initially not that of a lasting order but rather only for a common action, that freedom of participation of each and all is temporarily set aside. This first communal endeavor is thus more of an assembly of individualities than it is the dominion of abstract thought, which would rob singular individuals of their self-conscious participation in the willing and acts of the whole. 

728. The assembly of the spirits of different peoples constitutes a circle of shapes, which now deals with the whole of nature as well as with the whole ethical world. They too are under the supreme command of one of them rather than under his sovereign rule.42 For themselves, they are the universal substances of what the self-conscious essence is in itself and what it does. This, however, constitutes both the force and at least initially the focal point for the sake of which those universal essences endeavor and which initially seems to link their dealings only in an accidental fashion. However, the return of the divine essence into self-consciousness already contains the ground which fashions the focal point for those divine forces; it initially conceals their essential unity under the form of a friendly, external relation between both worlds. 

729. The same universality that corresponds to this content also necessarily has the form of consciousness, and it is in this form that it comes on the scene. It is no longer the actual doing of the cult; rather, it is a doing which has not yet been elevated to the concept but instead only to that of representational thought, to the synthetic linkage of self-conscious and external existence. This representational thought’s existence, language, is the first language, the epic as such, which contains universal content, or universal at least in the sense of the completeness of the world even though not in the sense of the universality of thought. The bard is the singular and the actual, and from whom, as the subject of this world, the world is created and by whom it is borne. His pathos is not the anesthetic power of nature; rather, it is Mnemosyne, the reflection and inwardness which has come to be, the memory of an earlier immediate essence. He is the organ vanishing within its content; what counts is not his own self but his muse, his universal song. But what in fact is present here is the syllogism, in which the extreme of universality, the world of the gods, is combined with that of singularity, the bard, by the mediating middle of particularity. The mediating middle is the people in its heroes, who, like the bard, are singular people but only as representationally thought,43 and they are as a result universal, like the free extreme of universality itself, namely, the gods. 

730. In this epic, what thus comes about in itself in the cult, the relation of the divine to the human, presents itself as such to consciousness. The content is an action of the essence conscious of itself. Acting disturbs the rest of the substance and arouses it; it thereby divides its simplicity and opens it up to the diverse world of natural and ethical forces. The action is the violation of the peaceful earth; it is the trench ensouled through blood, which provokes the departed spirits, who, thirsting for life, receive it in the doings of self-consciousness. The dealings, which are at issue in the universal endeavor, acquire two aspects, the self-like 44 aspect, accomplished by the totality of actual peoples along with the individualities who are the heads, and the universal aspect accomplished by their substantial powers. However, the relation between the two was previously determined so that it is the synthetic combination of the universal and the singular, or is representational thinking. It is on this determinateness that the assessment of this world hangs. – The relationship between the two is, as a result, an intermingling of both of them, a relationship which inconsistently divides the unity of the doing and which needlessly tosses the action from one side to the other. The universal powers have the shape of individuality and thereby have in them the principle of acting; their having an effect hence appears as a doing which originates wholly from out of them, an activity which is equally as free as those originating from the people. Hence, one and the same thing has been done by the gods as well as having been done by men. The seriousness of those former powers is a farcical superfluity, since this latter is in fact the force of the acting individuality – whereas the effort and labor of the latter is again a useless effort, since it is the former who direct everything. – The ephemeral mortals, who are nothing, are at the same time the powerful self which brings into subjection the universal essence, offends the gods, provides actuality for them, and provides the gods with an interest in doing something; just as, conversely, these powerless universalities, which nourish themselves on their gifts from mankind and only get something to do through people, are the natural essence and the basic material of all events and are equally the matter of ethical life and the pathos of doing. However much their elemental natures are initially 

391 

brought into actuality and into an activated relationship through the free self of individuality, still they are equally as much the universal that withdraws itself from this bond, which remains unrestricted in its destiny, and which through the invincible elasticity of its unity extinguishes the pointlike singleness of the actor and his figurations, preserves itself in its purity, and dissolves all that is individual in its fluidity. 

731. Just as the gods fall into this contradictory relation with the selflike nature confronting them, their universality just as much comes into conflict with their own determination and its relations to others. They are the eternal beautiful individuals, motionless in their own existence, removed from all transience and from alien power. – However, they are at the same time determinate elements, particular gods, who stand in relation to others. However, according to the opposition it involves, that relationship to others is a battle with those others, a comic self-forgetfulness about their own eternal nature. – That determinateness is rooted in the stable existence of the divine, and in its limitation it has the self-sufficiency of the whole individuality, through which their characters at the same time lose the sharpness of their very distinctiveness, and in their multiple meanings, they blend together with each other. – One purpose of activity, and their activity itself, since their activities are directed against an other and, as a result, against an unconquerable divine force, is a contingent and empty bravado, which itself likewise dissipates into nothing and transforms the apparent seriousness of action into a harmless, self-assured game without result and with no success. However much in the nature of their divinity, the negative, or determinateness, only appears as the inconsistency of their activity and as the contradiction between purpose and success, and however much that former self-sufficient self-assurance outweighs that determinateness, as a result the pure force of the negative confronts them as their final power, namely, as that against which they are without recourse. They are the universal and the positive with regard to the singular self of mortals, which cannot hold out against their power, but for that reason, the universal self, as the conceptless void of necessity, hovers over them and over this whole world of representational thought to which the entire content belongs – an event to which they relate selflessly and in sorrow, for these determinate natures are not to be found within this purity. 

732. However, this necessity is the unity of the concept, which subjugates the contradictory substantiality of the singular moments; it is that in which the inconsistency and contingency of their acts is brought into order, and the game which is made up of their actions receives its seriousness and value in the actions themselves. The content of the world of representational thought plays its game unbound and on its own45 within the mediating middle of its movement; it gathers round the individuality of a hero, who in his strength and beauty feels his life broken and who mourns the early death he sees ahead of him. For the singular individuality which is firm and actual within itself is expelled into an extremity, estranged in its moments which have not yet been found and are not yet united. The one singular individual, the abstract non-actual, is the necessity which does not participate in the life of the mediating middle, any more than does the other, the actual singular individual, the bard, who keeps himself outside of the mediating middle and who, in his performance,46 comes to his end. Both extremes must converge on the content; the one extreme, necessity, has to suffuse itself with the content, and the other, the language of the bard, must have a share in it; and the content which was formerly left to itself must preserve in its own self the certainty and the fixed determination of the negative. 

733. This higher language, that of tragedy, combines more closely the dispersal of the moments of the essential world and the world of action. According to the nature of the concept, the substance of the divine comes undone into its shapes, and their movement is likewise in conformity with the concept. With regard to form, language here ceases to be that of narrative since it has entered into the content just as the content has ceased to be that of representational thought. The hero is himself the speaker, and the performance47 shows the listener, who is at the same time also an onlooker, self-conscious people who know their own rights and purposes, the power and the will of their determinateness, and who know how to state those things. They are artists who do not express unconsciously, naively, and naturally what is external to their decisions and commencements, as is the case in the language which accompanies ordinary doings in actual life. Rather, they express the inner essence, they demonstrate the right of their action, and the pathos to which they belong is reflectively asserted and determinately expressed in its universal individuality, free from contingent circumstances and the particularities of personalities. Finally, these characters exist as actual people who take on the personae of the heroes and exhibit it to them in actual speech, not as a narrative, but in their own words. Just as it is essential for a statuary column to be made by human hands, the actor is likewise essential to his mask – not as an external condition, from which artistic considerations must abstract; or, to the extent that such an abstraction has to be made, it amounts to saying that art does not yet contain within itself the true, genuine self. 

734. The universal basis upon which the movement of these shapes proceeds, a movement which the concept itself has brought out, is the consciousness of the initial representational language and its self-less, sundered contents. It is the common people per se whose wisdom finds utterance in the chorus of the elders, and it is in the powerlessness of the chorus that the common people find their representatives, because they themselves constitute only the positive and passive material for the individuality of the government confronting them. Lacking the power of the negative, the chorus is unable to hold together and to restrain the wealth and the colorful fullness of the divine life; instead, it allows that life to come undone, and in its hymns of honor it praises each singular moment as a self-sufficient god, now praising this one, now that one, then now again another. However, where it feels the seriousness of the concept as the concept proceeds through these shapes and leaves them all in rubble as it does so, and where it comes to see how badly things go for its praised gods when they venture out on the ground where the concept rules, then it is not itself the negative power which actively intervenes there. Rather, it restricts itself to the selfless thought of such power, to the consciousness of an alien destiny, and it surrounds itself with the empty wish for reassurance and with feeble talk about appeasement. In its fear of the higher powers which are the immediate arms of the substance, in its fear of their struggles with each other and of necessity’s simple self, something which crushes those powers as well as the living beings bound up with them – in its compassion for the living, whom it knows at the same time to be the same as itself, there is for it only the idle terror of this movement, the equally helpless regret, and, in the end, the empty calm of resignation to necessity, whose work is grasped neither as the necessary action of the character nor as the activity of the absolute essence within itself. 

735. On the basis of this spectatorial consciousness as the indifferent soil of representational thinking, spirit does not come on the scene in its dispersed multiplicity but rather in the simple estrangement of the concept. Its substance thus shows itself only as ripped asunder into its two extreme powers. These elemental universal essences are at the same time self-conscious individualities – heroes who put their conscious life into one of these powers, who have in these powers their determinateness of character, and who constitute the activity and actuality of these powers. – This universal individualization descends again, as will be remembered, to the immediate actuality of real existence and presents itself before a crowd of spectators, who have in the chorus their counterpart, or instead have in it their own performance48 giving voice to itself. 

736. The content and movement of spirit, which is here an object to itself, has been already examined as the nature and realization of the ethical substance. In its religion, spirit attains a consciousness about itself, or it puts itself before its consciousness in its purer form and its simpler figuration. However much therefore the ethical substance, through its concept and according to its content, has estranged itself into two powers, which were determined as divine and human law, or the law of the netherworld and the law of the higher world – the former was that of family, the latter was that of state power – the first was the feminine, the other the masculine character – still the previously multiply formed circle of gods, wherein each wavered in their determinations, limits itself to these powers, which through this determination are brought nearer to genuine individuality. This is so because the previous dispersal of the whole into multiple and abstract forces, which appear substantialized, is the dissolution of the subject that comprehends them only as moments within its own self, and individuality is thus only the superficial form of that essence. Conversely, a further difference of characters than that just mentioned is to be attributed to the contingent and, in itself, external personality. 

737. At the same time, the essence divides itself according to its form or its knowing. As consciousness, acting spirit faces up to the object on which it is active, and which is thereby determined as the negative of the knowing subject. As a result, the knowing subject is situated in the opposition between knowing and not knowing. He takes his purpose from his character and knows it as the ethical essentiality; however, through the determinateness of his character, he knows only the one power of substance, and, for him, the other power is concealed. The current actuality is thus both an other in itself and an other for consciousness. In this relation, what the higher and lower law continue to mean are the power which knows and which reveals itself to consciousness and the power which conceals itself and lies in ambush. The one is the aspect of light, the god of the oracle, which, according to its natural moment, has sprung forth from the allilluminating sun, who knows all and reveals all – Phoebus and Zeus, who is his father. However, the commands of this truth-speaking god, along with his proclamations about what is, are instead deceptive, for within its concept, this knowing is immediately not-knowing, because in acting, consciousness is in itself this opposition. He who had the power to unlock the riddle of the sphinx itself, trustingly, as with childlike confidence, is sent to ruin through what the god reveals to him. This priestess through whom the beautiful god speaks is none other than the ambiguous49 sisters of fate, who, by their promises, drive the one who trusted them into crime, and who, by the two-faced character of what they gave out as a certainty, deceive the one who had relied on the obvious meaning of what they said. The consciousness which is purer than the latter, which believes the witches and is more reflectively prudent and more thorough than the former, which puts its trust in the priestess and the beautiful god, thus delays taking any revenge based on the revelation of the crime, a revelation made by his father’s spirit, that the father had been murdered; it contrives to bring about still other proofs – for the reason that the spirit making the revelation might possibly be the devil. 

738. This mistrust is well grounded for the reason that the knowing consciousness places itself into an opposition between the certainty of itself and the objective essence. The right of the ethical, namely, that actuality is nothing in itself in opposition to the absolute law, learns from experience that its knowing is one-sided, that its law50 is only a law of its character, and that it has grasped only the one power of substance. Action itself is this inversion of what was known into its contrary, into being; it turns the law of character and knowing into the law of their opposite, with which the former is bound up in the essence of the substance – it turns it into the Erinyes of that other power and character which was aroused into hostility. This lower law sits with Zeus on the throne and enjoys equal standing with the revealed law and the knowing god.51 

739. The divine world of the chorus is restricted to these three essences by the acting individuality. The one is the substance, which is the power presiding over both the hearth and home and the spirit of familial piety as much as it is the universal power of the state and of the government. While this difference belongs to the substance as such, in representational thought the difference is not individualized into two distinct shapes but rather has in actuality the two persons of its characters, whereas the difference between knowing and not-knowing falls in each and every one of the actual self-consciousnesses – and it is only in abstraction, in the element of universality, that it portions itself out into two individual shapes. For the self of the hero only has existence as a whole consciousness and hence is essentially the whole difference which belongs to the form, but the hero’s substance is determinate, and only one side of the difference of content belongs to him. Hence, of the two aspects of consciousness, which in actuality have no separate individuality belonging to each on its own, each receives in representational thought its own particular shape – the one is that of the revealed god, the other is that of the self-concealing Erinyes. In part, both enjoy equal honor, but in part, the shape of the substance, Zeus, is the necessity of the relation of both to each other. The substance is the relation, that knowing is for itself, but it has its truth in the simple; and that the difference, through which actual consciousness is, has its ground in the inner essence which is erasing it; and because the self-clear conscious assurance of certainty has its confirmation in forgetfulness. 

740. Consciousness unlocked this opposition by acting. In acting according to revealed knowing, it experiences the deceptiveness of that knowing, according to the content; in submitting to one of the attributes of substance, it violates the other, and as a result gives the latter a right against itself. Following the god that knows, it has on the contrary seized hold of what is not revealed, and it did penance for having trusted that knowing whose double-sided ambiguity, for this is its very nature, must have been also available for it and must have been a warning to it. The fury of the priestess, the inhuman shape of the witches, the voices of trees and birds, the dream, and so on, are not the ways in which truth appears; rather, they are warning signs of deception, of not being reflectively prudent, of the singularity and the contingency of knowing. Or, what amounts to the same thing, the opposite power, which consciousness has violated, is present as declared law and the legality validly in force, whether it be the law of the family or that of the state; consciousness, on the other hand, pursued its own knowing and hid from itself what was revealed. However, the truth of those powers emerging into opposition with each other is the result of each having an equal right, and for that reason, in their opposition which acting brings forth, of their being equally wrong. The movement of acting itself demonstrates their unity in the mutual downfall of both powers and of the self-conscious characters. The reconciliation of the opposition with itself is the Lethe of the netherworld in death – that is, the Lethe of the upper world in the form of absolution not from guilt, for consciousness cannot deny that it acted, but rather absolution from the crime itself and the absolution’s atoning appeasement. Both are forgetfulness, the disappearance of actuality and of the doings on the part of the powers of substance, of their individualities and of the powers of the abstract thought of good and evil, for none of them is for itself the essence. Rather, the essence is the motionlessness of the whole within itself, the unmoved unity of Fate, motionless existence, and thereby the inactivity and lack of liveliness of the family and government; and it is the equal honor and thereby the indifferent irreality52 of Apollo and the Erinyes, and the reversion of their spiritualization53 and activity into simple Zeus. 

741. This fate completes the depopulation of heaven, of that intermingling of individuality and essence which is devoid of thought – an intermingling through which this essence’s doing appears as inconsistent, contingent, and unworthy of itself. For individuality, when it adheres itself only superficially to essence, is inessential individuality. The expulsion of such essenceless representational thoughts, something demanded by the philosophers of antiquity, thus already begins in tragedy itself because the division of the substance is dominated by the concept, individuality is thereby essential individuality, and the determinations are the absolute characters. The self-consciousness represented in tragedy knows and recognizes on that account only one highest power. This Zeus is known and recognized only as the power of the state or of the hearth and home, and, in the opposition of knowing, only as the father of the knowing of the particular, a knowing that is coming to assume a shape – and as the Zeus of the oath and of the Erinyes, the Zeus of the universal, of the inner which dwells in concealment. The further moments are dispersed into representational thought from out of the concept, and the chorus permits them one after the other to be validly in force; those moments are, however, not the pathos of the hero, but rather, to him, they decline into passions – that is, they have declined into accidental essenceless moments, which the selfless chorus indeed praises but which are neither capable of constituting the character of heroes, nor of being enunciated and revered by the chorus as their essence. 

742. However, the persons of the divine essence itself, as well as the characters of its substance, merge into the simplicity of the unconscious. As opposed to self-consciousness, this necessity has the determination of being the negative power of all the shapes coming on the scene, of those shapes then not cognizing themselves in it but rather instead meeting their downfall. The self enters the scene only distributed among the characters, not as the mediating middle of the movement. However, self-consciousness, the simple certainty of itself, is in fact the negative power, the unity of Zeus, the unity of the substantial essence and abstract necessity; it is the spiritual unity into which everything returns. Because actual self-consciousness is still distinguished both from substance and from fate, it is in part the chorus, or rather is instead the crowd looking on, which this movement of the divine life as something alien suffuses with fear, or in which this movement, as something close to them, as touching them, brings forth an inactive compassion. Partly to the extent that consciousness acts in unison with the characters and belongs to them, is this union an external one, because the true union, namely, that of self, fate, and substance, is not yet present and available. This union is thus hypocrisy, and the hero who appears before the spectators fragments into both his mask and into the actor, into the persona54 and the actual self. 

743. The self-consciousness of the heroes must set aside its mask and show itself as knowing itself to be the fate of the gods of the chorus, as well as that of the absolute powers themselves, and as no longer separated from the chorus, from the universal consciousness. 

744. For the moment, it is comedy that has the aspect of actual selfconsciousness exhibiting itself as the fate of the gods. These elemental essences, as universal moments, are not selves and are not actual. They are, to be sure, outfitted with the form of individuality, but in their case this is only imagined55 and does not belong in and for itself to them; the actual self does not have that sort of abstract moment for its substance and content. It, the subject, is thus elevated above that sort of moment as it would be elevated above a singular property, and, wearing this mask, the subject expresses the irony of something that wants to be something for itself. The posturing of the universal essentiality is revealed in the self; it shows itself to be trapped in an actuality, and it lets the mask drop exactly as it wants to be something rightful. The self, coming on the scene here with the sense that it is actual, plays with the mask which it once put on in order to be its persona. – However, it just as quickly makes itself come out from this illusion and again come forward in its own nakedness and ordinariness, which it shows not to be distinct from the authentic self, from the actor, nor even from the spectator. 

745. This universal dissolution of shaped essentiality itself in its individuality becomes more serious in its content and as a result more wanton and more bitter to the extent that the content has its more serious and more necessary significance. The divine substance unifies within itself the meaning of natural and ethical essentiality. As regards what is natural, actual self-consciousness, in employing what is natural for its adornment, its dwellings, etc., and in feasting on its own sacrificial offerings, shows itself to be the fate to which the secret is betrayed, namely, the explanation of what self-consciousness has to with the self-essentiality56 of nature. In the mystery of bread and wine, it makes this self-essentiality of nature, together with the meaning of the inner essence, its own, and in comedy it is particularly conscious of the irony of this meaning itself. – Now, to the extent that this meaning incorporates the ethical essentiality, it in part means “the people” in both of its aspects, that of the state, or the genuine demos, and that of the singularity of family life. However, in part the meaning is that of self-conscious, pure knowing, or the rational thinking of the universal. – That demos, the universal social estate, which knows itself to be master and regent as well as being the understanding and insight which are to be respected, compels and bewitches itself through the particularity of its actuality, and it exhibits the laughable contrast between its own opinion of itself and its immediate existence, between its necessity and contingency, its universality and its ordinariness. However much the principle of its singular individuality, when separated from the universal, makes itself stand out in the genuine shape of actuality, and however much it openly appropriates the polity whose secret harm it is, still what is immediately revealed is the contrast between the universal as a theory and that with which practice is concerned, the contrast between the total emancipation of the immediate singular individuality’s purposes from the universal order altogether and the scorn which that singular individuality shows for such order. 

746. Rational thinking removes the contingency of shape from the divine essence. It takes the wisdom of the conceptless chorus, which produces all sorts of ethical adages and which allows for the validity of a multitude of laws and determinate concepts of duty and right, and it elevates them into the simple ideas of the beautiful and the good. – The movement of this abstraction is the consciousness of the dialectic which these maxims and laws have in themselves and is thereby the consciousness of the disappearance of the absolute validity in which they had previously appeared. While the contingent determination and the superficial individuality which representational thought lent to the divine essentialities now vanishes, those essentialities still have according to their natural aspect only the nakedness of their immediate existence; they are clouds, a disappearing vapor, exactly like those representational thoughts themselves. According to their conceived 57 essentiality, they have come to be the simple thoughts of the beautiful and the good, thoughts which are suited to being filled out with any kind of content at all. The force of dialectical knowing gives the determinate laws and maxims of action to the pleasure and exuberance of the youth which was – thereby – seduced by such knowing, and it puts weapons of deception into the hands of preoccupied and anxiety-ridden old age, itself restricted to the singularities of life. Through the emancipation from common opinion, which contains their determinateness as content as well as their absolute determinateness, the fixity58 of consciousness, the pure thoughts of the beautiful and the good, thus show the comical spectacle to be empty and, as a result, as becoming the game of opinionating and of the arbitrary choices of contingent individuality. 

747. Here therefore is the former unconscious fate, which consists in an empty motionlessness and forgetfulness and which is separated from self-consciousness, now united with self-consciousness. The singular self is the negative force through which and in which the gods, as well as their moments, those of existing nature and the thoughts of their determinations, disappear. At the same time, the singular self is not the mere emptiness of disappearance, but rather preserves itself in this nothingness itself, is at one with itself,59 and is the sole actuality. The art-religion has completed itself in it and is completely inwardly returned into itself. As a result, singular consciousness, in the certainty of itself, is that which exhibits itself as this absolute power, so has this absolute power lost the form of being something represented, something separated from consciousness per se and thus alien to it, as was the case with the statuary column and also the living embodiment of beauty, or as was the case with the content of the epic and the powers and persons of tragedy. – The unity is also not the unconscious unity of the cult and the mysteries. Rather, the genuine self of the actor coincides with the persona he plays, just as the spectator is perfectly at home with what is represented to him and sees himself playing a role therein. What this self-consciousness intuits is that within itself, whatever assumes the form of essentiality opposed to self-consciousness is instead dissolved in the thinking, existence, and doings of self-consciousness, and it is then abandoned. It is the return of all that is universal into the certainty of itself, and this certainty is thus the complete absence of fear, the essencelessness of all that is alien; it is a healthy well-being as well as a consciousness permitting itself to be so, a well-being that outside of this comedy is not to be found. 

# C. Revealed Religion

748. Through the art-religion, spirit has left the form of substance to enter into that of subject, for the art-religion engenders its shape, and it posits, as lying in that shape, doing, or self-consciousness, which itself only vanishes in the fearsome substance and does not grasp itself with any confidence. This incarnation of the divine essence originates in the statuary column, which has in itself only the external shape of the self; however, the inner shape, the self’s activity, falls outside of it. In the cult both aspects have become one. In the result of the art-religion, this unity in its completion has at the same time also passed over into the extreme of the self. In spirit, which is completely certain of itself in the singular individuality of consciousness, all essentiality is submerged. The proposition which expresses this exuberance goes this way. The self is the absolute essence; the essence was the substance, and it was that in which the self was accidental; the essence has sunk all the way down into being a predicate, and in this self-consciousness, over and against which there is nothing facing it in the form of essence, spirit has lost its consciousness. 

749. This proposition, “The self is the absolute essence,” belongs, as is evident, to the non-religious, actual spirit, and it must be recalled which shape of the actual spirit expresses it. This shape will contain at the same time the movement and the reversal of that which humbles the self into a predicate and elevates substance into subject, so that the converse statement does not in itself, or for us, make substance into subject, or, what is the same thing, does not restore substance so that the consciousness of spirit is led back to its beginning, or to natural religion. Rather, it is to do so in such a way that this reversal is brought about for and through self-consciousness itself. While this self-consciousness consciously forsakes itself, it is preserved in its self-relinquishing, and it remains the subject of the substance, but, as having relinquished itself, it has at the same time the consciousness of this substance; or while, through its sacrifice, it brings out the substance as subject, this subject remains its own self. The point is thereby reached so that, if, in the first of both propositions the subject only disappears into substantiality – and in the second proposition, the substance is only a predicate, and both aspects are present in each of them with an opposed inequality of value – then the union and permeation of both natures emerges, in which both, with equal value, are likewise essential as well as being only moments. 

As a result, spirit is thus equally consciousness of itself as its objective substance just as it is simple self-consciousness which endures within itself. 

750. The art-religion belongs to the ethical spirit, which we saw earlier come to an end in the state of legality, i.e., in the proposition: The self as such, the abstract person, is absolute essence. In ethical life, the self is immersed in the spirit of its people; it is universality filled out. However, simple singular individuality elevates itself out of this content, and its levity refines it into a person, into the abstract universality of law. In the latter, the reality of the ethical spirit is lost, and the contentless spirits of individual peoples are collected together into one pantheon, not into a pantheon of representational thought, whose powerless form lets each do as it likes, but rather into the pantheon of abstract universality, of pure thought, which takes their lives and confers on the spiritless self, on the singular person, being-in-and-foritself. 

751. However, through its emptiness, this self has set the content free; consciousness is only within itself the essence; its own existence, the legal recognition of the person, is the unfulfilled abstraction. Therefore, it instead possesses only the thought of itself, or in the way it is there and knows itself as object, it is the non-actual self. Hence, it is only the stoic self-sufficiency of thinking, and as it passes through the movement of the skeptical consciousness, it finds its truth in the shape that was called the unhappy self-consciousness. 

752. This self knows the story about what actually counts concerning the abstract person; it likewise also knows the story about what counts concerning the person in pure thought. It knows that what this amounts to is instead a complete loss; it is itself this loss which has become conscious of itself, and it is the self-relinquishing of its knowing of itself. – We now see that the unhappy consciousness constituted the counterpart and the culmination of the consciousness that was perfectly happy within itself, namely, the comic consciousness. All divine essence returns back into this comic consciousness, or it is the complete self-relinquishing of substance. In contrast, the unhappy consciousness is conversely the tragic fate of the certainty of itself that is supposed to be in and for itself. It is the consciousness of the loss of all essentiality in this certainty of itself and of the loss even of this knowing of itself – It is the loss of substance as well as of the self, the pain that expresses itself in the harsh phrase that God is dead. 

753. In the state of legality, therefore, the ethical world and its religion have been absorbed into the comic consciousness, and the unhappy consciousness is the knowing of this entire loss. Lost to it are both the self-worth of its immediate personality as well as that of its mediated, conceived 60 self-worth. Likewise, the trust in the eternal laws of the gods fades away, as do the oracles who knew what to do in the particular cases. The statuary columns are now corpses from which the animating soul has escaped, just as the hymns are now words from which belief has fled. The tables of the gods are without spiritual food and drink, and consciousness does not receive back from its games and festivals the joyful unity of itself with the essence. The works of the muse lack the force of the spirit which, from out of the crushing of the gods and of man, has engendered its certainty of itself. They are now what they are for us – beautiful fruit broken off from the tree, a friendly fate passing those works on to us as a gift, in the way a young girl might present that fruit; the actual life in which that fruit existed no longer exists, nor does the tree that bore them, nor the earth and the elements that constituted their substance, nor the climate that constituted their determinateness, nor the alternation of the seasons that governed the process of their coming-to-be. – With those works of art, fate does not give us their world, does not give us the spring and summer of the ethical life in which they bloomed and ripened; rather, it gives us solely the veiled remembrance of this actuality. – In our enjoyment of them, our doing is thus not that of the divine worship, which would result in its complete truth filling out our consciousness. Rather, our doing is external, which wipes off some drop of rain or speck of dust from these fruits, and, in place of the inner elements of the actuality of the ethical that surround it, create it, and give spirit to it, we erect the extensive framework of the dead elements of their outward existence, their language, their history, etc., not in order to live in those elements ourselves, but only to represent them as they were in themselves. However, the young girl who presents us the plucked fruits as a gift is more than the nature that immediately provided them, more than the nature that unfurls into their conditions and elements, into the trees, air, light, etc., while in a higher way she gathers all this together into the gleam of her self-conscious eye and her offertory gesture; just as she is more than that nature, so too the spirit of the fate that provides us with those works of art is more than the ethical life and actuality of that people, for it is the inwardizing-recollecting61 of the spirit in them that was still alienated, 62 – it is the spirit of the tragic fate that collects all those individual gods and attributes of the substance into the one pantheon, into the self-conscious spirit conscious of itself as spirit. 

754. All the conditions for its emergence are present, and this totality of its conditions constitutes its becoming, its concept, or its emergence existing-in-and-for-itself. – The cycle of the productions of art embraces the absolute substance’s forms of self-relinquishing; the absolute substance is in the form of individuality, as a thing, as an existing object of sensuous consciousness, – as the pure language, or the coming-to-be of the shape whose existence does not come out of the self and which is a purely vanishing object – as an immediate unity with universal self-consciousness in its inspiration and as a mediated unity in the doings of the cult – as beautiful self-like embodiment, and finally as existence elevated into representational thought and the unfurling of this existence into a world which, in the end, pulls itself together into the universality which is just as much the pure certainty of itself. – These forms, and, on the other side of the coin, the world of the person and legal right, the devastating savagery of the content’s elements cast out into free-standing status, as well as both the person of stoicism as it has been thought63 and the untenable disquiet of skepticism, all constitute the periphery of those shapes, which, expectantly and with urgency, stand around the birthplace of spirit becoming self-consciousness, and they have as their focal point the all-permeating pain and yearning of the unhappy self-consciousness and the communal birth pangs of its emergence, – the simplicity of the pure concept, which contains those shapes as its moments. 

755. Spirit has two aspects in it, which are represented above as two converse propositions. One is this, that substance relinquishes itself of its own self and becomes self-consciousness; the other, conversely, is that selfconsciousness empties itself of itself and makes itself into thinghood, or into the universal self. Both aspects have in this way accommodated each other, and their true union has thereby arisen. The self-relinquishing of substance, its becoming self-consciousness, expresses the transition into the opposite, into unconscious necessity, or, it expresses that it is in itself self-consciousness. Conversely, the self-relinquishing of self-consciousness expresses this, that self-consciousness is in itself the universal essence, or, because the self is pure being-for-itself, which in its opposite remains at one with itself,64 it expresses this, that the substance is self-consciousness and, precisely as a result, is spirit. Hence, it can be said of this spirit which has forsaken the shape of substance and entered into existence in the shape of self-consciousness – if one wishes to use the relationships drawn from the process of natural generation – that it has an actual mother but a father who exists-in-itself, for actuality, or self-consciousness, and the initself, as substance, are both of its moments, and through their reciprocal self-relinquishing, where each becomes the other, spirit thus enters into existence as their unity. 

756. To the extent that self-consciousness one-sidedly grasps only its own self-relinquishing, then if, to itself, its object is thus already just as much Being as it is the self, and if it knows all existence as spiritual essence, then as a result true spirit has not come to be for self-consciousness, insofar as being as such, or substance in itself, has not for its part likewise emptied itself of itself and become self-consciousness, for all existence is spiritual essence only from the standpoint of consciousness and not in itself. With regard to existence, spirit is in this manner only imaginary; this imagination is that gushing enthusiasm that reads into nature as well as into history, just as it also reads into the world and into the mythical representational thoughts of the preceding religions, a different inward sense from what they, from within their own appearance, immediately offer to consciousness, and, in the case of those religions, it reads into them a different sense than the self-consciousness whose religions they were actually knew in them. However, this meaning is one that is borrowed, a garment that does not cover the nakedness of the appearance and that warrants neither belief nor veneration. Rather, it remains the murky night of consciousness, the rapture proper to consciousness. 

757. If therefore this latter meaning of the objective is not to be mere imagination, it must be in itself, which is to say, for consciousness it must first of all have its source in the concept and must emerge in its necessity. In that way, self-knowing spirit has arisen for us through the cognition of immediate consciousness, or of the consciousness of the existing object through its necessary movement. This concept, which, as the immediate concept, also had the shape of immediacy for its consciousness, has, secondly, given itself the shape of self-consciousness in itself, i.e., precisely according to the necessity of the concept by which being, or immediacy, which is the contentless object of sensuous consciousness, relinquishes itself of itself and, for consciousness, becomes the I. – The immediate in-itself, or the existing necessity itself, is, however, differentiated from the thinking initself, or the cognizing of necessity – a difference which at the same time, however, does not lie outside of the concept, for the simple unity of the concept is immediate being itself. The concept is precisely that which is self-relinquishing, or it is the coming-to-be of intuited necessity as it is at one with itself in that necessity, and it knows it and conceptually comprehends it. – The immediate in-itself of spirit, which gives itself the shape of self-consciousness, means nothing other than that the actual world-spirit has arrived at this knowing of itself. At that point, this knowing also then enters into its consciousness for the first time, and as truth. How that came about resulted from the above. 

758. This, that absolute spirit has given itself the shape of selfconsciousness in itself and thereby also for its consciousness, now appears in the following way. The faith of the world is that spirit is there as a selfconsciousness, that is to say, as an actual person, that spirit is for immediate certainty, that the faithful consciousness sees, feels, and hears this divinity. In that way, it is not imagination; rather, it is actual in the believer. Consciousness then does not start from its inner, from thought, and then within itself bring together the thought of God with existence; rather, it starts from the immediate present existence and takes cognizance65 of God in it. – The moment of immediate being is present and available in the content of the concept in such a way that, in the return of all essentiality into consciousness, the religious spirit has become the simple positive self just as the actual spirit as such was in the unhappy consciousness just as much as this simple self-conscious negativity. As a result, the self of the existing spirit has the form of complete immediacy; it is posited neither as what is conceived,66 nor as what is represented, nor as what is produced, as it is with the immediate self in part in natural religion and in part in art-religion. Rather, this God is sensuously intuited immediately as a self, as an actual singular individual person, and only so is he self-consciousness. 

759. This incarnation of the divine essence, or that it essentially and immediately has the shape of self-consciousness, is the simple content of absolute religion. In absolute religion, the essence is known as spirit, or religion is the essence’s consciousness of itself as being spirit, for spirit is knowing itself in its self-relinquishing; spirit is the essence which is the movement of maintaining the equality with itself in its otherness. However, this is substance insofar as it is in its accidentality equally reflected into itself, but not as indifferent with regard to what is inessential and thus as finding itself existing in something alien. Rather, it is situated therein within itself, which is to say, insofar as it is subject, or self. – In this religion, the divine essence is for that reason revealed. Its being revealed obviously consists in this, that what it is, is known. However, it is known precisely because it is known as spirit, or as essence that is essentially self-consciousness. – Something in its object is kept secret from consciousness if the object is an other for consciousness, or alien to it, and if consciousness does not know the object as itself. This secret ceases to be when the absolute essence as spirit is an object of consciousness, for it is in that way that the absolute essence exists as the self in its relations to it, which is to say, the essence immediately knows itself therein, or it is revealed to itself in the object. It itself is revealed to itself only in its own certainty of itself; the former, its object, is the self, but the self is nothing alien; it is rather the inseparable unity with itself, the immediate universal. The self is the pure concept, pure thinking, or being-for-itself, immediate being, and thereby being for an other, and as this being for an other, it has immediately made an inward return into itself and is at one with itself;67 it is therefore what is truly and solely revealed. The gracious, the righteous, the holy, creator of heaven and earth, etc., are predicates of a subject – universal moments that have their foothold in this point and only are in the return of consciousness into thinking. – While they are known, their ground and essence, the subject itself, is not yet revealed, and, likewise, the determinations of the universal are not this universal itself. However, the subject itself, and thereby also this pure universal, is manifestly the self, for this self is precisely this inner reflected into itself, which immediately is there and is that self’s own certainty, the self for which it is there. This – to be what is revealed according to its concept – is therefore the true shape of spirit, and this, its shape, the concept, is likewise solely its essence and substance. Spirit is known as self-consciousness and is immediately revealed to this self-consciousness, for it is this selfconsciousness itself. The divine nature is the same as the human nature, and it is this unity which is intuited. 

760. Here therefore consciousness, or the mode in which the essence is for consciousness, or its shape, is indeed the same as its self-consciousness; this shape is itself a self-consciousness. It is thereby at the same time an existing object, and this being likewise immediately signifies pure thinking, the absolute essence. – The absolute essence, which is there as an actual self-consciousness, seems to have descended from its eternal simplicity, but in fact it has thereby achieved for the first time its highest essence. For it is when the concept of essence has first attained its simple purity that it is the absolute abstraction which is pure thinking, and is thereby the pure singular individuality of the self in the way that, on account of its simplicity, it is the immediate, or being. – What is called sensuous consciousness is precisely this pure abstraction; it is this latter thinking for which being is the immediate. The lowest is thus at the same time the highest; the revealed, which has come forth entirely on the surface, is precisely therein what is deepest. What is in fact the consummation of its concept is that the highest essence is seen, heard, etc., as an existing self-consciousness, and through this consummation, the essence immediately is there in the way that it is the essence. 

761. This immediate existence is at the same time not solely and merely immediate consciousness; it is religious consciousness. What the immediacy inseparably signifies is not only an existing self-consciousness but also the essence which has been purely conceived,68 that is, the absolute essence. What we are conscious of in our concepts, namely, that being is essence, is what the religious consciousness is itself aware of. This unity of being and essence, of thinking which is immediately existence, is the thought of this religious consciousness, its mediated knowing, just as it is equally its immediate knowing, for this unity of being and thinking is self-consciousness and itself is there, or it is the conceived 69 unity which at the same time has this shape of that of which it is. God is therefore here revealed as He is; He is there in the way that He is in itself; He is there as spirit. God is solely attainable in pure speculative knowing, He is only in that knowing, and He is only that knowing itself, for He is spirit, and this speculative knowing is revealed religion’s knowing. That knowing knows Him as thinking, or pure essence, and it knows this thinking as being and existence, and knows existence as the negativity of itself, and hence as the self, as this self and a universal self. This is precisely what revealed religion knows. – The hopes and expectations of the preceding world pushed their way towards this revelation, towards the intuition of what the absolute essence is, and towards finding themselves in that revelation. This joy comes to be to selfconsciousness, and it takes up the whole world, this joy in viewing oneself in the absolute essence, for it is spirit, it is the simple movement of those pure moments, which it itself expresses: The essence is known as spirit as a result, at first, of its being intuited as immediate self-consciousness. 

762. This concept of spirit knowing itself as spirit is itself the immediate, and not yet developed concept. The essence is spirit, or it has appeared, it is revealed. This initial being-revealed is itself immediate; however, the immediacy is likewise pure mediation, or thinking; and it must thus exhibit this as such in its own self. – If it is examined more determinately, then spirit, in the immediacy of self-consciousness, is this singular self-consciousness as contrasted with universal self-consciousness. It is the excluding One, which, for the consciousness for which it is there, still has the undissolved form of a sensuous other. This other does not yet know spirit to be its own, or, just as spirit is a singular self, as well as a universal self, as well as each and every self, spirit is not yet there. Or, the shape does not yet have the form of the concept, i.e., of the universal self, of the self which, in its immediate actuality, is just as much something sublated, is thinking itself, is universality, but which is also equally all those things without losing its immediate actuality therein. – The preliminary and even immediate form of this universality is, however, not already the form of thinking itself, of the concept as concept; it is rather the universality of actuality, the all-ness of the self and is the elevation of existence into representational thought. As in all cases, and to take a specific example, the sublated sensuous this is just the thing of perception but not yet the universal of the understanding. 

763. Therefore, this singular individual man, to whom the absolute essence is revealed, brings to culmination in himself as a singular individual the movement of sensuous being. He is the immediately present God; as a result, his being passes over into having-been. Consciousness, for which he has this sensuous presence, ceases to see him and hear him: it has seen him and heard him. As a result of its having only seen and heard him, it becomes itself spiritual consciousness, or just as he previously arose as sensuous existence for consciousness, he has now arisen in spirit. – For, as the sort that sensuously sees and hears him, consciousness is itself only immediate consciousness which has not sublated the inequality of objectivity, has not withdrawn itself into pure thinking, but rather knows this objective singular individual but not itself as spirit. In the disappearance of the immediate existence of what is known as absolute essence, immediacy acquires its negative moment; spirit remains the immediate self of actuality, but as the universal self-consciousness of a religious community,70 a self-consciousness which is motionless in its own substance just as this substance is the universal subject in the universal self-consciousness. Spirit is not the singular individual for himself but the singular individual together with the consciousness of the religious community; and what the singular individual is for this community is the complete whole of spirit. 

764. However, the past and remoteness are only the incomplete form of the way in which the immediate mode is mediated, or is posited universally. This latter is only superficially plunged into the element of thinking, it is as a sensuous mode preserved in that element, and it is not posited as being at one with the nature of thinking itself. It has been only elevated into representational thinking, for this is the synthetic combination of sensuous immediacy and its universality, or of thinking. 

765. This form of representing constitutes the determinateness in which spirit is conscious of itself in this, its religious community. This form is not yet the self-consciousness of spirit which has advanced to its concept as concept; the mediation is still incomplete. Therefore, in this combination of being and thinking, there is a defect present, that the spiritual essence is still burdened by an unreconciled estrangement into a this-worldliness and an other-worldly beyond. The content is the true content, but all of its moments, posited as lying in the element of representational thinking, have the character of not having been conceptually comprehended.71 Rather, they appear as completely self-sufficient aspects which are externally related to each other. For the true content also to obtain its true form for consciousness, the higher cultural formation of the latter is necessary, and its intuition of the absolute substance must be elevated into the concept, and, for consciousness itself, its consciousness must be balanced out with its selfconsciousness just as this has come about for us, or in itself. 

766. This content is now to be examined in the way it is in its consciousness. – Absolute spirit is content, and so is it in the shape of its truth. However, its truth is not only to be the substance of the religious community, or the in-itself of the religious community, nor also is it only to emerge out of this inwardness into the objectivity of representational thinking.72 Its truth is to become the actual self, to reflect itself into itself and to be the subject. This is therefore the movement which spirit accomplishes in its religious community, or this is its life. What this self-revealing spirit is in and for itself is therefore not brought out by having, so to speak, its rich life in the community wound up and then scaled back to its original threads, or even perhaps to the representational thoughts of the first imperfect religious community or back to what the actual man said. This scaling back is based on the instinct to get to the concept, but it confuses the origin, as the immediate existence of the concept’s first appearance, with the simplicity of the concept. Through this impoverishment of the life of spirit, this tidying up of the religious community’s representational thoughts and doings, what thereby emerges is, instead of the concept, mere externality and singularity, the historical mode of immediate appearance, and the spiritless recollection of a fancied singular shape and its past. 

767. Spirit is the content of its consciousness initially in the form of pure substance, or it is the content of its pure consciousness. This element of thinking is the movement of its descent into existence, or into singular individuality. The mediating middle between them is their synthetic combination, the consciousness of coming-to-be-other, or of representational thinking as such. The third moment is the return out of representational thought and out of otherness, or is the element of self-consciousness itself. – These three moments constitute spirit; its coming apart in representational thought consists in its therein being in a determinate mode. However, this determinateness is nothing but one of its moments. Its detailed movement therefore is this: To unfold its nature into each of its moments as an element; and while each of these spheres completes itself within itself, this reflective turn into itself is at the same time the transition into the other. Representational thought constitutes the mediating middle between pure thinking and self-consciousness as such, and is only one of the determinatenesses, but at the same time (as has been shown), its character, which is to be the synthetic combination, is diffused throughout all these elements and is their common determinateness. 

768. The content which is itself up for examination has partly already turned up as the representational thought of the unhappy and of the faithful consciousness. – However, in the unhappy consciousness it turned up as having the determination of the content which was engendered from out of consciousness and for which it yearns, in which spirit can neither be satiated nor find rest because spirit is not yet in itself its own content, or is not yet its content as its substance. On the other hand, in the faithful consciousness, this content was regarded as the selfless essence of the world, or as the essentially objective content of representational thinking73 – a representational thinking which flees from actuality altogether, and which thus does not have the certainty of self-consciousness, a certainty which is separated from it partly as a conceit of knowing and partly as pure insight. – However, the consciousness of the religious community has the content as its substance, just as the content is the religious community’s certainty of its own spirit. 

769. Spirit, represented initially as substance in the element of pure thinking, is immediately thereby the simple, eternal self-equal essence, which however, does not have this abstract meaning of essence but rather that of absolute spirit. Yet spirit is this, not to be a meaning, not to be the inner, but rather to be the actual. Hence, the simple eternal essence would be spirit only according to empty words if it were to remain in representational thought and in the expression of simple eternal essence. However, because it is an abstraction, simple essence is in fact the negative in itself; indeed, it is the negativity of thinking, or negativity of thought as it is in itself in the essence, i.e., it is the absolute difference from itself, or it is its pure becoming-other. As essence, it is only in itself, or for us, but while this purity is the abstraction itself, or negativity, it is for itself, or it is the self, the concept. – It is thus objective, and while representational thought grasps and expresses as an event what has just been expressed as the necessity of the concept, so it will be said that the eternal essence, to itself, creates an other. However, in this otherness, it has equally immediately reverted into itself again, for the difference is the difference in itself, i.e., the difference is immediately distinguished only from itself, and it is thus the unity reverted into itself. 

770. There are therefore three moments to be distinguished: Essence; being-for-itself that is the otherness of essence and for which essence is; and being-for-itself that is self-knowing in an other. The essence intuits only itself in its being-for-itself; in this self-relinquishing, it is only at one with itself,74 is the being-for-itself which excludes itself from the essence, is the essence’s knowing of itself; it is the word, which, when spoken, relinquishes the speaker and leaves him behind as emptied and hollowed out, but which is likewise immediately interrogated, and it is only this hearingand-interrogating-of-itself that is the existence of the word. In that way, the differences which are rendered are likewise immediately dissolved as they are rendered, and they are equally immediately rendered just as they are dissolved, and the true and the actual are this very movement circling around within itself. 

771. This movement in itself expresses the absolute essence as spirit. The absolute essence which is not grasped as spirit is only the abstract void, just as spirit, when it is not grasped as this movement, is only an empty word. As its moments are grasped in their purity, they are restless concepts, which only are in being themselves their own opposite and being motionless in the whole. However, the community’s representational thinking is not this conceptually comprehending thinking, but rather has the content without its necessity and, instead of the form of the concept, it brings the natural relationships of father and son into the realm of pure consciousness. While in that way even in thought it relates to itself representationally, the essence is indeed revealed to it, but the moments of this essence, on account of this synthetic representation, separate themselves in part from each other so that they are not related to each other through their own concept. In part, this consciousness retreats away from this, its pure object, and it relates itself only externally to it. The object is then revealed to it by something alien,75 and in this thought of spirit, it does not cognize itself and does not cognize the nature of pure self-consciousness. To the extent that the form of representational thinking and those relationships derived from the natural must be surpassed – and to the extent that what must be especially surpassed is taking the moments of the movement which is that of spirit, to be themselves isolated immovable substances or subjects instead of transitional moments – then this surpassing is to be viewed as conceptual compulsion (as was previously noted in regard to another aspect). However, while it is only an instinct, it mistakes itself, tosses out the content together with the form, and, in what ultimately amounts to the same thing, debases the content into a historical representation and an heirloom of the tradition. What is retained therein is only what is purely external in faith and thereby is retained as something dead, devoid of knowing;76 and what is inward in faith has vanished, because that would be the concept knowing itself as concept. 

772. Absolute spirit, represented in the pure essence, is indeed not the abstract pure essence. Rather, as a result of its being only a moment in spirit, the abstract pure essence has instead declined into an element. However, the exhibition of spirit in this element has, according to the form, in itself the same defect that the essence has as essence. The essence is the abstract, and for that reason it is the negative of its simplicity, is an other. Likewise, spirit in the element of essence is the form of simple unity, which for that reason is equally essentially a coming-to-be-other. – Or, what is the same thing, the relation of the eternal essence to its being-for-itself is the immediately-simple relation of pure thinking; in this simple intuiting of itself in the other, otherness therefore is not posited as such. It is the difference as it is in pure thinking, which is to be immediately no difference, or a recognition of love, in which both are, according to their essence, not opposed to each other. – Spirit, which is expressed in the element of pure thinking, is essentially itself just this, that it is does not exist only in pure thinking; it is also actual, for lying in the concept of spirit is otherness itself, i.e., the sublation of the pure concept which has only been thought.77 

773. The element of pure thinking, because it is the abstract element, is instead itself the other of its own simplicity, and it thus passes over into the genuine element of representational thinking – the element in which the moments of the pure concept acquire a substantial existence with regard to each other as they are subjects, which for a third subject, do not have the indifference of Being towards each other. Rather, they take a reflective turn into themselves, isolate themselves from each other, and oppose themselves to each other. 

774. Therefore, the merely eternal or abstract spirit becomes an other to itself, or it enters into existence and immediately into immediate existence. It therefore creates a world. This creating is representational thought’s word for the concept itself according to its absolute movement, or it is its word for the simplicity which has been expressed as the absolute, or as pure thinking, and which, because it is abstract thinking, is instead the negative and thereby opposed to itself, or is other: – or, to state the same thing in yet another form, because what is posited as essence is simple immediacy, or being, but which as immediacy, or as being, dispenses with the self and therefore lacks inwardness and is passive, or is being for an other. – This being for an other is at the same time a world. Spirit in the determination of being for an other, is the motionless stable existence of those moments which were formerly enclosed in pure thinking, and it is therefore the dissolution of their simple universality and their splitting up into their own particularity. 

775. However, the world is not only spirit thus thrown and dispersed into completeness and its external order. Rather, since spirit is essentially the simple self, this self is likewise present in the world. It is the existing spirit which is the singular individual self which is both conscious and which distinguishes itself from itself as an other, or as a world. – Just as it is thus initially immediately posited, this singularly individual self is not yet spirit for itself; it therefore is not yet as spirit; it can be called innocent, but not, however, good. For it in fact to be the self and to be spirit, it must just as much become an other to itself, just as the eternal essence exhibits itself as the movement of being equal to itself in its otherness. While this spirit is determined initially as immediately existent, or as dispersed into the manifoldness of its consciousness, its coming-to-be-other is knowing taking-the-inward-turn. Immediate existence is converted into thought, or consciousness that is only sensuous is converted into consciousness of thoughts, indeed because thought has emerged from out of immediacy, or because it is conditioned thought, it is not pure knowing, but rather thought which has otherness in it and is thus the self-opposed thought of good and evil. Man is represented in such a manner that this is something that just happened and was not anything that was necessary – it just happened that man lost the form of self-equality by plucking the fruits from the tree of the knowing of good and evil, and that he was driven out of the state of innocent consciousness, out of a nature that offered itself up to him without his having to labor for it, out of paradise, out of the garden of the animals. 

776. While this taking-the-inward-turn by existing consciousness immediately determines itself as the becoming-unequal-to-itself, so does evil appear as the first existence of the consciousness that has taken the inward turn; and because the thoughts of good and evil are utterly opposed, and this opposition has not yet been dissolved, so this consciousness is essentially only evil. However, at the same time according to this opposition, there is also present the good consciousness opposing the one that is evil and their relationship to each other. – To the extent that immediate existence is converted into thoughts, and insofar as inwardly-turned-being, which is in part itself thinking and is in part the moment of the coming-to-be-other of essence more precisely determined, then the coming-to-be of evil can be shifted back even further out of the existing world and transferred into the first realm of thinking. It can thus be said that it was already the first-born son of light who, by taking the inward turn, was he who fell, but that in his place another was at once created. Such forms of expression as “fallen” as well as that of “the son” belong merely to representational thought and not to the concept, and they both equally devalue the moments of the concept into moments of representational thinking, or they carry representational thinking over into the realm of thought proper. – It is likewise a matter of indifference as to whether a manifoldness of other shapes and forms is to be coordinated with the simple thought of otherness in the eternal essence and the inward turn is then transferred to them. This co-ordination must be endorsed because, as a result, this moment of otherness at the same time expresses diversity, as it should, namely, not as plurality per se, but rather at the same time as determinate diversity, so that one part is the son, who is simple knowing of himself as the essence, while the other part is the selfrelinquishing of being-for-itself, which lives only in the praise of essence, and the taking back of the relinquished being-for-itself and the inward-turn of evil can also again be put in this part. Insofar as otherness comes undone into two parts, spirit would be in its moments more determinate, and if the moments were to be enumerated as a four-in-one, or, because the class breaks itself up again into two parts, namely, the part that remained within the good and the part that became evil, spirit might even be expressed as a five-in-one. – However, counting the moments can be viewed as altogether useless, as in part what has been differentiated is itself equally as much only one difference, namely, the thought of difference is itself only one thought, just as it is this which is distinguished, or is the second thing which is distinguished vis-à-vis the first. – However, in part it is useless to enumerate these things, because the thought which grasps the many in one must be broken down out of its universality and distinguished into more than three or four differences – with regards to the absolute determinateness of the abstract One, namely, the principle of number, this sort of universality appears as indeterminateness in relation to number as such, such that one could speak only of numbers per se, i.e., not of the number of differences. It is therefore entirely superfluous to think here of number and enumeration, just as in other respects the mere difference between magnitude and amount is utterly devoid of the concept and says nothing. 

777. Good and evil turned out to be determinate differences of thought. While their opposition has not yet been dissolved, and while they are represented as the essence of thought, each of which is self-sufficient for itself, so is man the self with no essence and is the synthetic basis of their existence and struggle. However, these universal powers belong just as much to the self, or the self is their actuality. According to these moments, it therefore happens that just as evil is nothing but the inward-turn of the natural existence of spirit, so conversely the good enters into actuality and appears as an existing self-consciousness. – What in the purely conceived78 spirit is only intimated as the coming-to-be-the-other of the divine essence here comes closer to its realization for representational thinking. To representational thinking, the coming-to-be-the-other of the divine essence consists in the divine essence humbling itself and renouncing its abstraction and non-actuality. – The other aspect, that of evil, is taken by representational thinking to be an event alien to the divine essence. To grasp evil in the divine essence itself as the divine essence’s wrath is the supreme and most severe effort of which representational thinking, wrestling with itself, is capable; an effort which, since it lacks the concept, remains a fruitless struggle. 

778. The alienation of the divine essence is therefore posited in its twofold mode. The self of spirit and its simple thought are the two moments whose absolute unity is spirit itself. Its alienation consists in the two moments separating themselves from each other, and in one having an unequal value with regard to the other. This inequality is for that reason twofold, and two combinations emerge, whose common moments are the ones given here. In the one, the divine essence counts as the essential, and natural existence and the self as the inessential, as something to be sublated. On the other hand, in the other, it is being-for-itself which counts as the essential, and the divine in its simplicity counts as the inessential. Their still empty mediating middle is existence per se, the mere commonality of their two moments. 

779. The dissolution of this opposition does not so much take place through the struggle between the two moments, which are represented as separate and self-sufficient essences. What lies in their self-sufficiency is that in itself each must in its own self, through its concept, dissolve itself. The struggle initially begins where both cease to be this mixture of thought and self-sufficient existence and where they confront each other only as thoughts, for, as determinate concepts, they essentially are only in that oppositional relation. In contrast, as self-sufficient concepts, they have their essentiality outside of their opposition; their movement is therefore free movement, which belongs properly to themselves. Just as the movement of both is therefore the movement in itself because the movement of both is to be observed in them, so it is that the movement also begins in the one which is determined as existing-in-itself in contrast to the other. This is represented as an act of free will; but the necessity for its self-relinquishing lies in the concept, namely, that what exists-in-itself, which has that determination only in opposition, has for that very reason no truly stable existence. – Therefore, it is the one to which what validly counts as the essence is not being-for-itself but the simple itself; and this is the one that relinquishes itself of itself, goes to its death, and as a result reconciles the absolute essence with itself, for in this movement it exhibits itself as spirit. The abstract essence is self-alienated, it has natural existence and self-like actuality. This, its otherness, or its sensuous presence, is taken back again by the second coming-to-be-other, and it is posited as sublated, as universal. As a result, the essence has in that sensuous presence come to be itself. The immediate existence of actuality has thus ceased to be alien, or external, to that essence, as it is what is sublated, or what is universal. Thus, this death is its resurrection as spirit. 

780. The sublated immediate presence of self-conscious essence is this essence as universal self-consciousness. This concept of the sublated singularly individual self that is the absolute essence thus immediately expresses the constitution of a religious community,79 which previously lingered in representational thinking, but which now returns to itself as a return into the self; and thus spirit makes the transition from the second element of its determination, or from representational thinking, into the third, into self-consciousness as such. – If we further examine the way in which representational thinking conducts itself in its advancing movement, we initially see that this is expressed as the divine essence taking on a human nature. In that expression, it has already stated that in itself, both are not separated – just as the divine essence therein relinquishes itself of itself at the very outset, just as its existence takes an inward turn and becomes evil, just as it is not explicitly stated but is contained in the expression that in itself this evil existence is not alien to the divine essence. Absolute essence would be only an empty name if in truth there were an other to it, if there were to be a fall from it. – The moment of inwardly-turned-being instead constitutes the essential moment of the self of spirit. – That this inwardly-turned-being, which is thereby actuality, belongs to the essence itself, this latter, which for us is the concept and to the extent that it is a concept, appears to representationally thinking consciousness as an incomprehensible occurrence; and to representational thinking, the in-itself takes on the form of indifferent being. However, the thought that these moments which seem to be in flight from each other are in fact not separated, namely, the moments of absolute essence and of the self existing-for-itself, also appears to this representational thinking– for it does possess the true content – but this representational thought comes afterwards in the self-relinquishing of the divine essence which becomes flesh. This representational thought is in this manner still immediate and hence not spiritual. It knows the human shape of the essence initially only as a particular and not yet as a universal form; it becomes spiritual for this consciousness in the movement of the shaped essence, which again sacrifices its immediate existence and returns into the essence. The essence, as taking a reflective turn into itself, is spirit. – The reconciliation of the divine essence with the other as such, and, specifically, with the thought of this other, of evil, is thus therein representationally thought. – However much according to its concept this reconciliation is expressed as consisting in stable existence, because evil in truth is supposed to be in itself the same as the good, or however much even that the divine essence is in truth the same as nature in its entire extent, still nature is, as separated from the divine essence, only nothingness – and this must be viewed as an unspiritual mode of expression which necessarily gives rise to misunderstandings. – When evil is the same as good, then evil itself is not evil, nor is goodness good, but both have instead been sublated. Evil per se is the inwardly-turned being-for-itself,80 and the good is the self-lessly simple. While in this way they are both expressed according to their concept, at the same time the unity of the two becomes clear, for inwardly-turned being-for-itself is simple knowing, and the self-less simple is likewise pure inwardly turned being-for-itself. – If it must thus be said according to this latter concept of good and evil (which is to say, insofar as they are not good and evil) that good and evil are the same, then it must equally be said that they are not the same but rather are utterly different, for simple being-for-itself, or pure knowing, is likewise pure negativity, or the absolute difference in them themselves. – Just these two propositions complete the whole, and the first can only be asserted and secured if one insurmountably and obstinately clings to it when it is confronted by the other. While both are equally right, they are both equally wrong, and their wrong consists in taking such abstract forms as “the same” and “not the same,” “identity” and “non-identity,” to be something true, fixed, actual, and in resting one’s case on such abstract forms. Neither the one nor the other has truth; what does have truth is their very movement. In this movement, the simple “the same” is the abstraction and is thereby the absolute difference, while this latter, as the difference in itself, is distinguished from itself and is therefore selfequality. This is what is the case with the this-sameness-with-self 81 of the divine essence, with nature per se, and with human nature in particular. The former is nature insofar as it is not essence; the latter is divine according to its essence. – However, it is spirit in which both abstract aspects are posited as they are in truth, namely, as sublated – a positing that cannot be expressed by the judgment and by the spiritless “is” of the judgmental copula. – Likewise, nature is nothing outside of its essence. However, this nothing itself nonetheless is; it is the absolute abstraction and therefore is pure thinking, or inwardly-turned-being, and, together with the moment of its opposition vis-à-vis spiritual unity, it is evil. The difficulty that occurs with these concepts is due solely to clinging tenaciously to the “is” and forgetting the thinking in which the moments are as much as they are not – are only the movement that is spirit. – This spiritual unity is the unity in which the differences are only as moments, or as sublated. It is this unity which came to be for that representationally thinking consciousness in that reconciliation, and, while this unity is the universality of self-consciousness, self-consciousness has ceased to be representational. The movement has returned back into it. 

781. Spirit is therefore posited in the third element, in universal selfconsciousness; spirit is its religious community. The movement of this religious community, as self-consciousness which has differentiated itself from its representational thought, is that of bringing out what has come to be in itself. The dead divine man, or the human God, is in itself universal self-consciousness; He has to become this for this latter self-consciousness. Or, while this self-consciousness constitutes one side of the opposition in representational thought, namely, the side of evil, which itself takes natural existence and singular being-for-itself to be the essence, this latter aspect, which is represented as self-sufficient and not yet as a moment, must for the sake of its self-sufficiency in and for itself elevate itself to spirit, or it has to exhibit the same movement in its self-sufficiency. 

782. This aspect is natural spirit; the self has to pull back from this naturalness and turn inward, which would mean that it would become evil. However, it is already in itself evil; taking-the-inward-turn thus consists in convincing itself that natural existence is evil. The existing coming-to-be-evil of the world and the world’s being-evil falls on the side of representationally thinking consciousness, just as does the existing reconciliation of the absolute essence. However, that which was represented according to its form as only a sublated moment falls on the side of self-consciousness as such, for the self is the negative, and is therefore knowing – a knowing that is a pure doing of consciousness within itself. – This moment of the negative must likewise express itself in the content. While the essence is in itself already reconciled with itself and is a spiritual unity in which the parts of the representation are sublated, or are moments, it turns out that each part of the representation here receives a meaning opposite to that which it had before. As a result, each meaning is completed in the other, and only as a result is the content a spiritual content. While the determinateness is just as much its opposite, the unity in otherness, or the spiritual unity, is completed; just as formerly for us, or in itself, the opposite meanings had themselves unified themselves, even the abstract forms of the same and not-the-same, of identity and non-identity have been sublated. 

783. However much therefore in representationally thinking consciousness the inwardizing82 of natural self-consciousness was existing evil, still the inwardization in the element of self-consciousness is the knowing of evil as what is in itself in existence. Thus, this knowing is admittedly a coming-to-be of evil, but it is only the coming-to-be of the thought of evil and is for that reason given recognition as the first moment of reconciliation; for, as a return into itself from out of the immediacy of nature, which is determined as what is evil, it is the forsaking of that immediacy and to die unto sin. It is not natural existence as such that consciousness forsakes but the natural existence that is at the same time known as evil. The immediate movement of taking-the-inward-turn is equally as much a mediated movement. – It presupposes itself, or it is its own ground. The ground for taking-the-inward-turn is, in particular, because nature in itself has already taken the inward turn; on account of evil, man must take the inward turn, but evil is itself taking-the-inward-turn. – For that reason, this first movement is itself only the immediate movement, or is its simple concept, because it is the same as what its ground is. The movement, or the coming-to-be-other, thus still has to come on the scene in its own genuine form. 

784. Therefore, other than this immediacy, the mediation of representational thought is necessary. Both the knowing of nature as the untrue existence of spirit and this universality of self which has taken the inward turn are each in themselves the reconciliation of spirit with itself. For the non-conceptually comprehending self-consciousness,83 this in-itself receives both the form of an existent and the form of something represented to it. Therefore, to that self-consciousness, conceptually grasping the matter does not consist in getting a grip on this concept, which knows sublated natural existence to be universal and thus to be reconciled with itself. Rather, it consists in getting a grip on the representational thought that the divine essence is reconciled with its existence through the event of the divine essence’s own relinquishing of itself, through its incarnation which has already occurred and its death. – To get a grip on this representation is now to express determinately just what it is in representational thought which only a short while ago was called the spiritual resurrection, or its singular self-consciousness coming to be the universal, or its coming to be the religious community. – The death of the divine man, as death, is abstract negativity, the immediate result of the movement which only comes to an end in natural universality. In spiritual self-consciousness, death loses this natural significance, or it becomes its already stated concept. Death is transfigured from what it immediately means, i.e., from the non-being of this singular individual, into the universality of spirit which lives in its own religious community, dies there daily, and is daily there resurrected. 

785. What belongs to the element of representational thought, absolute spirit representing the nature of spirit in its existence as a singular spirit or instead as a particular spirit, is therefore shifted here into selfconsciousness itself, into the knowing that sustains itself in its otherness. This self-consciousness thus does not therefore actually die off in the way that the particular is represented to have actually died; rather, its particularity dies off in its universality, which is to say, in its knowing, which is the essence reconciling itself with itself. That initially antecedent element of representational thinking is therefore posited here as sublated, or it has returned into the self, into its concept; what was only an existent in the former has become the subject. – precisely by doing so, the first element, pure thinking, and the eternal spirit in it are also no longer an other-worldly beyond to representationally thinking consciousness, nor are they an otherworldly beyond to the self; rather, the return of the whole into itself consists precisely in containing all moments within itself. – The death of the mediator, which has so deeply moved the self, is the sublation of his objectivity, or of his particular being-for-itself; this particular being-for-itself has become universal self-consciousness. – On the other side of the coin and just as a result, the universal is self-consciousness, and the pure, or the non-actual spirit of mere thinking has become actual. – The death of the mediator is the death not only of his natural aspect, or of his particular being-for-itself. What dies is not only the already dead outer shell stripped of essence but also the abstraction of the divine essence, for the mediator is, to the extent that his death has not yet completed the reconciliation, one-sided, which as one-sided knows the simplicity of thinking as the essence in opposition to actuality. This extreme of the self is not yet of equivalent value with the essence; it is only as spirit that the self has that value. The death of this representational thought contains at the same time the death of the abstraction of the divine essence which is not yet posited as a self. That death is the agonized feeling of the unhappy consciousness that God himself is dead. This harsh expression is the expression of the inmost simple-knowingof-oneself, the return of consciousness into the depth of the night of the I  I which no longer differentiates and knows nothing external to it. This feeling thus is in fact the loss of substance and of the substance taking a stance against consciousness. However, at the same time it is the pure subjectivity of substance, or the pure certainty of its own self which it lacked as object, as immediacy, or as pure essence. This knowing is therefore spiritgiving, as a result of which substance becomes subject, its abstraction and lifelessness have died, and it has become actual, simple, and universal selfconsciousness. 

786. In this way spirit is therefore spirit knowing itself. It knows itself, and what is, to itself, an object, or its representation, is the true absolute content. As we saw, the content expresses spirit itself. It is at the same time not only the content of self-consciousness and not only an object for selfconsciousness; it is, rather, also actual spirit. It is this because it runs through the three elements of its nature, and this movement in and through itself constitutes its actuality. – What moves itself is spirit; it is the subject of the movement, and it is likewise the moving, or the substance through which the subject passes. Just as to ourselves the concept of spirit came to be when we entered into religion, namely, as the movement of spirit certain of itself which forgives evil and therein lets go of its own simplicity and rigid unchangeableness, or the movement in which the absolute opposites cognize themselves to be the same, and this cognition bursts forth as the Yes between these extremes – so too the religious consciousness to which the absolute essence is revealed intuits this latter concept, and it sublates the difference between its own self and what it intuits. As it is subject, so too is it substance, and thus is itself spirit just because and to the extent that it is this movement. 

787. However, this religious community has not yet reached its completion in this, its self-consciousness. Its content is in the form of representational thinking, and this estrangement also still has in itself the actual spirituality of the religious community, its return from out of its representational thinking, just as the element of pure thinking was itself also burdened with that opposition. This spiritual religious community also does not have a consciousness about what it is; it is spiritual self-consciousness, which, to itself, is not this object, or does not develop into a consciousness of itself; rather, to the extent that it is consciousness, it has those representational thoughts that have been examined. – We see self-consciousness at its last turning point becoming, to itself, inward, and arriving at the knowing of its inwardly-turned-being; we see it relinquish itself of its natural existence and gain pure negativity. However, the positive meaning, that this very negativity, or the pure inwardness of knowing, is just as much the self-equal essence, or that substance has here arrived at absolute selfconsciousness, all this is an other for the devotional consciousness. It gets a grip on this aspect, that the pure inwardization of knowing is in itself absolute simplicity, or is the substance, as the representational thought of something which is the way it is not according to its concept but rather as the action of an alien satisfaction.84 Or, it is not this for the devotional consciousness: That this depth of the pure self is the power through which the abstract essence is pulled down out of its abstraction and elevated to the self through the power of this pure devotion. – As a result, in relation to the devotional consciousness, the doing of the self retains this negative meaning because the substance’s self-relinquishing is for the self an in-itself which the self likewise does not grasp and comprehend, or which it does not find in its doing as such. – While this unity of essence and self has in itself taken place, consciousness also still has this representational thought of its reconciliation, but as a representation. It achieves satisfaction as a result of externally adding to its pure negativity the positive meaning of the unity of itself with essence; its satisfaction thus itself remains burdened with the opposition of an other-worldly beyond. Its own reconciliation therefore enters into its consciousness as something remote, something far away in the future, just as the reconciliation which the other self achieved appears as something remote in the past. Just as the singularly individual divine man has a father existing-in-itself and only an actual mother, so too the universal divine man, the religious community, has as its father its own doing and knowing, but for its mother it has eternal love, which it only feels but does not intuit in its consciousness as an actual immediate object. Its reconciliation consequently is in its heart, but it is still estranged from its consciousness, and its actuality is still fractured. What enters into its consciousness as the in-itself, or the aspect of pure mediation, is the reconciliation which lies in the other-worldly beyond, but what appears as current, as the aspect of immediacy and of existence, is the world, which still has to await its transfiguration. The world is indeed in itself reconciled with the essence; and it is indeed known of that essence that it no longer cognizes the object as self-alienated, but cognizes it as the same as itself in its love. However, for self-consciousness, this immediate present does not yet have spiritual shape. The spirit of the religious community is in its immediate consciousness still separated from its religious consciousness, which indeed declares that in itself these two are not supposed to be separated, but that they have become an in-itself which is not realized, or which has not yet become an equally absolute being-for-itself. 